What we discovered is the probability that any sensory system has ever been shaped to see any
true feature of objective reality. When you do the math, the answer is zero. Exactly zero.
Well, you realize you're making a very bold claim. Embodied consciousness, consciousness
existing inside bodies, is the exception to the rule. Detachment from the five senses actually
allows you greater knowledge. A good example being near-death experiences.
The amount of things that we don't see in reality, we don't see electric fields. The 8 million
species are just the 8 million species that it's adaptive for our survival to see. How do we then
try to triangulate and figure out what true reality actually is? To date, science cannot answer that
question. There are an infinite number of alien intelligences. Our headset gives us a very, very,
very tiny peak at this. And the recursive trace logic gives us a mathematical framework to begin
to understand exactly how our space-time headset is built, how it can be hacked. Whoa!
So it's an infinite scale of consciousness. That's right. Not in just one direction. In an infinite number
of different directions. So this is when we get to the UAP kind of stuff. The craft seems to be here,
and then it goes Mach 40. To me, it's like... When you're poking at the boundaries with your
consciousness or with high-energy physics, you see these entities and you see these UFOs.
Do you think we're on the verge of a scientific revolution?
If we prove those conjectures are true, then I think it's the game-changer.
The ignition sequence 5. How is this possible? Nothing too unusual about that.
The existence cannot longer be denied.
We've talked a bit about longevity and life extension on this show. Extending your telomeres,
metabolic optimization, and the through line is always the same. Most of what determines how long
you live comes down to really basic stuff, not these more exotic treatments. I think about that
sometimes when I realize it's 10 p.m. and I haven't eaten all day because I was deep in prep for the
next episode, which is kind of the story of my life since I moved to Austin. Occasionally, I'll be so
deep in work that I'll forget to eat, and then I end up demolishing whatever's closest at midnight.
Guys, this solution is amazing. It's a game-changer for anyone who's busy. Meals show up ready to go.
You heat them up in two minutes, and they're actually made with real food. Lean proteins,
whole ingredients, no seed oils, no refined sugar. Over 100 options that rotate weekly. I've been
doing it for a bit now, and it is embarrassingly simple. I'm not a great chef. I don't like
overspending every day on delivery. I really don't know why I waited so long for this.
Head to factormeals.com slash alchemy50off and use code ALCHEMY50OFF. That's ALCHEMY50OFF to get
50% off and free breakfast for a year. The offer is only valid for new Factor customers
doing an auto-renewing subscription purchase. Do yourself a favor now. Make healthier eating
easy with Factor.
All right, Don Hoffman, thank you so much for being here. It's an honor.
Thank you for having me, Jess. It's great.
I've seen a lot of your podcasts, and I've now read your book. And you have this incredible theory
where it's not adaptive for us to see reality. And it's this idea of fitness beating perception.
For the people who are unfamiliar, can you give a little bit of a summary of what you mean by that,
what that is? And then I want to delve off into way crazier territory than any other podcast has
taken you.
Okay. The standard idea that we have about evolution and our perceptions of the world is
that evolution has shaped us to be fit. And to be fit, we should probably see the truth,
right? If I see a train, I should really know that there really is a train and I won't step in front
of it. If I see a cliff, I shouldn't jump off. So it would be fit, we think, to have evolution
shape our sensory systems to see reality as it is. Maybe not all of reality, but most of reality
that we need. That would be a standard intuition. And there are mathematical tools now. So when
Darwin wrote his theory, he did it based on his fieldwork and his own brilliance and came up with
this evolution by natural selection idea, which is brilliant. But it took another century before we
turned it into mathematics. John Maynard Smith turned it into mathematics, evolutionary game
theory. So we could actually now ask technical questions. We don't have to sort of speculate.
We can actually run games or prove theorems. And so I and my graduate students and collaborators have
done both testing this question. On Darwin's theory, what is the probability that evolution would shape
any sensory system of any sensory system to see truths about the world? And I went into it expecting that
we would maybe not see all the truth, but we would see some of it and so forth. But what we discovered
was that evolution does shape us to see whatever will make us fit. And that does not mean at all
that we're going to see the truth. In fact, what we discovered is the probability of zero that any sensory
system has ever been shaped to see any true feature of objective reality. Precisely zero.
Can you give us a super concrete example of an organism actually not seeing reality and that somehow being
adaptive for its survival?
Yes. So there's plenty. Almost all of our sensory experiences are of this type, as it turns out.
So when you see colors, for example, you're not seeing the electromagnetic spectrum,
the actual wavelengths of photons and so forth. You're just collapsing that into something that
we call colors, red, green, blue, yellow, and so forth. When you taste various kinds of foods,
you're not getting a chemical, you know, this is C2, H3, whatever. You are getting what we would call
an experience of taste. And so the way I think about it is that what you've got is not a window
on reality. It's more like a desktop on your computer, for example. So in a desktop, you'll see
that there are icons on your screen. There might be a blue folder in the middle of your screen
for some file that you're working on, some paper. But that doesn't mean that inside your computer,
there's something that's really blue and rectangular in the middle of the computer, right? Just because
it looks like that on your screen doesn't mean that that's reality. Inside the computer, there's
nothing blue. There's no folder. There are just bits. There are, you know, voltages that are being
toggled millions of times a second in a particular pattern. And that is hidden from you. That is way too
complicated for you to deal with. If you had to toggle bits, you could never write your paper,
for example, or edit your photo. So you don't want to toggle bits. You need to have eye candy
that dumbs things down. And so that's what evolution has done for us. It's given us, you could think of
it as like a desktop interface. So there's, whatever reality is, is quite complicated. You just need to
know how to interact with reality in a useful way to do what you need to do. Like in the case of the
desktop analogy, to edit a photo, to write a paper, whatever it is that you're doing. And so it would
actually not be fit in the computer analogy to have to toggle the voltages to write a paper. If you had to
toggle voltages to write a paper, someone who didn't have to do that will beat you to the deadline, for
example, and getting a paper done. So, so that's what evolution has done for us. It is basically
hidden all of reality that we don't need to know about.
Well, the implications of what you're saying go even deeper because a desktop interface is built
for us. Right.
And so we, as the agents sort of using the desktop interface, you know, the person who built it,
you know, maybe Steve Wozniak originally or something would say, it's not adaptive for a person to know
how, you know, logic gates and, and bits work and semiconductors work. So we're going to iconize all of
this. We're going to compress these things and abstract all of this into symbolic logic that a person can
understand. And in reality, it would work the exact same way. We wouldn't be able to manipulate
reality in many cases. For example, like you said, you know, seeing the electromagnetic, you know, wave
spectrum, uh, of, you know, photons that that's not super helpful. You'd want to iconize the thing,
say, say, oh, that's red. I'm bleeding, you know, and then you, you can instantly react.
Exactly. And the same thing with like temperature, you don't need to know the absolute temperature.
You just need to know if it's too hot for me, too cold for me, or just right for me. That's all you
really need to know. So you, it's, so it's really evolution shaped us to have just the parameters we
need, the sensory inputs we need to make the actions that will keep us alive long enough to
reproduce. So that's the key thing is just reproductive fitness. And then there's one
key difference in this analogy, uh, in the case of, you know, desktop computers, you have supply
chains where you have to scale like a repeatable process and sort of, you know, sell the same thing
to everybody, maybe with a few variations. In our case, there are infinite numbers of variations when it
comes to our genetics and our phenotypes. And so we're all sort of seeing a very different local
reality based on our own kind of idiosyncratic perceptive apparatus.
Absolutely. There are remarkable cases of that. So, so for example, there are some men who are
dichromats. So they only have two color photoreceptors instead of the normal three, but even more
interesting are women who are tetrachromats. So they have four color receptors, not just the three
that would norm. And so these women actually see colors that no man could even imagine. No man has
ever seen them. No man can even imagine what these women are experiencing. And, and so, yeah, there are,
there's lots of variations in the headset or in the, um, you know, in the interface that evolution
and, and from an evolutionary point of view, you want to sort of tinker with the interface. You do try
things. Um, there are, you know, people who are synesthetes, um, who actually blend colors and shapes
in ways that we don't normally do that. And, and so there, so this one guy, everything that he tasted,
uh, Watson, a guy named Watson, I think, everything he tasted with his mouth, he also, uh, saw things
and, and he could feel things. So he could, he would have a sensory thing with his hands. And so he
actually was a great cook because he had this extra way of, you know, relating to the cooking and the
tasting. He didn't just taste it. He could say, you know, although this thing has too many dents and
bumps in it or something like that. And, and, and, you know, maybe that one will, that adaptation
will, will carry on or maybe, maybe not, but each, you know, it tries a lot of different things.
But, but the big idea is that evolution shapes you to be successful at reproducing, period.
And seeing the truth gets in the way. Having an interface that guides adaptive behavior is
exactly what you need. Now, I should say, I'm by no means the first to say this kind of thing. I
would tip my hat to a good friend of mine, Steven Pinker, who wrote a paper, um, so how does the
mind work? In which he makes this very same kind of point. Um, I think the place where, where Steven
and I may differ is I I'm taking it and saying, even what we call physical objects in space and
time, everyday physical objects there, I think he would disagree with me. So that would be a fun
conversation, but I'm saying even this cup is just an icon. It's not, there's nothing about objective
reality that corresponds directly to a cup. This is, this is the cup to reality is just like the blue
folder on my desktop to the bits in the computer that, that I'm dealing with. So it's that abstract
a relationship. Don't a lot of babies have synesthesia up until six months as well. The
sort of association of colors and sounds. There, there may be some evidence for that. That's not
my areas, but, but yeah, I think there, there is some evidence. Synesthesia does of course carry on
later on for a lot of people. So, but it's, yeah, it's, um, I actually don't know the case for the,
for, for babies. I don't know if you know about this phenomena, but, um, the CIA also studied
psychic spies for 30 years or for a little bit. Yes. Officially for 23 years, they probably are
still studying this stuff, but there was a program called Stargate. It went under a couple of different
names. Apparently a lot of the remote viewers are synesthetes as well. Interesting. Yeah. So I don't
know what that means, but that is the mixing of the senses. Yeah. You have to ask what, what does the
evolutionary, for example, adaptation good for if you're having synesthesia and so forth. Also,
there are autistic kids who seem to have all sorts of unusual abilities as, as well, which is, again,
you could ask about an evolutionary count of that, but I haven't actually looked at that, but they do
seem to have sensory systems that are very different than, than normal people. Yeah. It seems like,
yeah, there are these nonverbal autistic children. It seems like they have different epistemic
circuitry or something, or in certain cases, maybe where one sense goes, another gets heightened
or something. Right. Because they're nonverbal, maybe, you know, what we call intuition and the rest
of us is heightened. But in fact, it doesn't even, it seems like more than intuition. It seems like a
way to gather knowledge that works around the five senses. Right. You'll put a mother in, you know,
another room of one of these children, they'll be blindfolded and, you know, totally separate room.
You'll have random images generate on an iPad for the mother. And, you know, 19 out of 20 times,
they're like describing what the mother is seeing. And from my understanding, I think some of this
stuff has to be done a little more rigorously if you want to apply the real, you know, true scientific
method to it. But I also think there's like an overwhelming amount of anecdotal data and, and
there probably is something there. And it's, it's fascinating.
It is. I've seen those studies in which the autistic child who can hardly even control their
body is able to read what's in their mother's mind. And I've looked at the design of the experiments
and they seemed in certain cases to be pretty rigorous. And these kids were not just sort of
guessing the numbers, they were pounding them out as fast as they could and getting it exactly right
in dozens and dozens of trials. And so that's the kind of thing that you, that's the kind of data you
have to take quite seriously. And, and you're going to need a pretty serious theory outside of the
normal space-time physics kinds of theories, I think, to try to explain that kind of, of a non-physical
connection.
Well, it seems like a pattern being disembodied and actually gaining greater knowledge because of
your disembodiment. So your detachment from the five senses actually allows you greater knowledge.
A good example being near-death experiences where people say that they floated around the room or like
learn certain things that they couldn't know if they were housed in their body. So it's almost
like the body is a collapsing function on a greater state of default, higher knowledge.
Absolutely. And I'm working on a mathematical model that predicts precisely that. So I've got a model we
can talk about that I call the recursive trace logic.
Whoa.
And I just discovered in the last two or three weeks that it does, this model does predict that
embodiment is a special case, that the normal case for consciousness in this framework is not to be
embodied. So we're, we're sort of stuck in one of the more rickety kinds of interfaces, the more,
more limit, limiting kind of interface. And, but the mathematics makes it very, very clear that
embodiment is not at all required for this. In fact, it's in this mathematics, it's measure zero,
probability zero. So there, the idea would be that of all the kinds of consciousnesses that are out
there, the ones that have to be embodied are probability zero, which is, which blew me away.
And that's just been two or three weeks ago that I found it in the mathematics.
That's fascinating. And it dovetails with a lot of religious stories around the quote unquote, fall of man.
Yes. Yeah. It's, it's, it's, it's blowing me away. So I've only had this, this mathematics
for about three weeks and it made me rethink this, this whole, the whole thing, because
why it's very, if you think about it, when you're embodied, you can't just mean, if I want this cup
to be over there, I can't just sort of sit here and go and make it do that. I just can't do that.
I have to, what do I have to do? There are certain things that I can control.
Fingers, toes, legs, there's very, very little. If you think about it, there's very little that
I control my mouth, my head, my, all the things we call our body. That's it. If I want that cup
to go somewhere, I have to do things with my hands intelligently to make that other thing happen.
Yeah. And then, so, but that's one of the restrictions of embodiment is that to get
things, we can go to the moon. We can send probes to Mars, but to do that, we have to be exceedingly
clever because all, to get to the moon, all I can do is move my fingers, my toes, my arms. That's all
I can do. I have to play with the rest of reality in such a way that eventually I go to the moon. I
can't just sort of, so that's. It's low bandwidth and high latency. That's right.
It takes a long time to, there's sort of like an intention and, you know, action translation delay
and function. That's right.
And it's sort of low bandwidth too, because you just have a certain amount of neurons and,
you know, even the ability to develop a sophisticated intention, you know, we're seeing LLMs beat us all the
time with things like this.
Yeah. So it's, it's very much like giving an athlete a real handicap. So, so, you know,
maybe everybody's running a marathon, but you, you, you make them run it with terrible shoes and,
and you know, back, you know, pack on their back and so forth. And that's sort of what embodiment is.
It's sort of like, you can play the game of consciousness and, and, and move things around,
but you're so restricted. You have to do it in these specific ways. So you have to be very
creative. You have to be very, very clever. So it may be, and we, this is one of the more
restrictive kinds of interfaces, but on the other hand, it may be that, that it's a bigger challenge
for consciousness. In some sense, if I just want this thing to move and it moves, not much of a
challenge. If I have to actually, I mean, as a baby, you have to actually go through the whole process
of learning that, you know, I don't have to slap my hand in my face with this thing. I can,
I actually can control this thing and I can actually move things. You have to learn all
this stuff and then learn that that's all you can do. If I, if I want that carrot, I actually,
the carrot just won't come to me. I have to get the carrot and have to figure that all out.
So it's in some sense, our, even though our, our kind of interface that requires embodiment is
probability zero in the set of all possible interfaces. It's one that really forces a
certain kind of intelligence and a certain kind of problem solving. So that's an interesting
look on things that you wouldn't get from a purely physicalist framework.
Well, you realize you're making a very bold claim, which is you're saying that
embodied consciousness, consciousness existing inside bodies is the exception to the rule.
That's, that's what the, the mathematics that I'm working on. And I should mention my,
my colleagues, you know, Chaitan Prakash and Robert Prentner and Manish Singh and,
and Manifa Hermanson and others that I'm working with. It's, that's the work that we're doing.
So it's not just me. So it's a whole group of us that it, and this new trace logic that we're
working on really, it just, when you look at it and ask, okay, what, what are bodies? How
do they appear in this logic of, of experiences? Body embodiment is, is very, very small,
but of course there's a lot to explain about this whole trace logic because it's,
it's a mathematical foundation that's entirely non-physical. It's all about consciousness. So
we'll probably need to go into the notion of consciousness and observation and why we need
to start science there and so forth.
I want to get into the trace logic and sort of flesh that out, but you would also have to say
that you'd expect predictions and observations of non-human disembodied intelligence that's
disembodied in a way that's adaptive beyond humans all over the universe. The universe would be teeming
with life that is more advanced than humans and also doesn't have, you know, traditional bodies. Is that
correct?
Yeah. The mathematics seems to indicate that, um, again, embodiment is the exception, not the rule.
Mm-hmm. And that our particular kind of view of the world, the kind of, I'll call it a headset,
the, the, the, the virtual reality headset that we're using for our embodiment is one of the more
trivial kinds of headsets. So we're, we have the, often the opinion of ourselves that we're pretty
much near the top of the food chain here on earth. Anyway, it certainly looks like it for, for most of us
and, and that we're the most intelligent things around and so forth. But when I look at the
mathematics of this trace logic, it, it indicates that our headset is one of the cheapest.
Yeah.
Most restrictive possible. And that there are all sorts of variations that are far more interesting
and complicated than what we've got.
Well, it's interesting. There are 8 million species on earth and a wild thought experiment
would be how many of those species think that they're at the top of the food chain. Some subset
must not think that they are. They have, I'm sure, predators that seem far more sophisticated that they
see at certain points in their life and freak out and, you know, try to avoid all the time.
And others must live in this kind of solipsistic, you know, thing, and they think they're the most
sophisticated. And so who are we to say that we're not just an example of that and that there are
things, you know, going on above our head in this sort of the dark forest teeming, teeming with life.
I completely agree. If you think about what I see of an ant, the ant has its life, but it seems
fairly simple to me. And if I think about what do I think an ant knows about me? Almost nothing.
Nothing about my intellectual life, my friends, politics, religion, science. I mean, does it know
it? No. And in fact, if I were cruel, I could come over, go like that and kill it. And it wouldn't
even know that I was about to do it. So how much does the ant know about me? Almost nothing.
Yeah. And so, but then I have to ask myself, well, maybe what would I look like to an ant? Maybe I'd
look like something insignificant if I looked at something insignificant.
Or something cosmological or weather phenomena or something like that.
Or just nothing at all, right?
Or nothing. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But now turnabout is fair play. All I see in my perception is something that seems fairly trivial
to me. It's just an ant. But that is not necessarily an insight into reality. That's just
a limitation of my headset. From my headset point of view, I see something that seems trivial. It's
just an ant. What I could be interacting with, if I could actually take the headset off, I might fall
down in amazement before it, right? So it goes both ways. The idea that we're the biggest thing
in town is out the window, at least in the mathematics that I'm doing. Not at all. At least
our headset is nowhere near the top. It's in fact almost as trivial as you can be and still have a
headset. So we have one of the more trivial headsets. So I think all around us, the things that look
trivial to us, even inanimate, that's just because the headset is dumbing things down. On the other
side of the headset, it's mind-blowing what's out there. It's compressing the thing in a way that's
adaptive for your own survival. And that's sort of all you can say about it. That's right. That's
right. And by the way, that aspect, the evolutionary argument, I should say, that's not just a hand
wave. It's a theorem. In evolutionary game theory, there are things called fitness payoff
functions. And you can think of them simply as, you know, maybe I'm an organism in a particular
state. Maybe I'm hungry. And I'm thinking about different actions like eating, feeding, flying,
whatever. So a fitness payoff function says for a given organism, a state, and an action,
I'll give you a number, which is your payoff for taking that action. So maybe it goes from zero to
100. Zero, you lose. 100 is the most points. And effectively, these points are saying how likely it
is that you're going to survive long enough to reproduce. Okay? So for you to be shaped by
evolution, by natural selection, to see true structures in the world, the payoff functions
that are guiding your evolution have to contain information about the structure of the world. For
example, if there's some kind of metric structure that you want to know about the world, if that metric
structure is completely unknown to your payoff function, there is no way for the payoff function
to tune you to that metric structure in the world. Or if there's a topology, or if there's any kind of
structure that you want to think about a partial order, if the payoff function does not know about
that structure, then it can't tune you to the structure. So there's a nice, clean question that we can
ask here. For any particular structures in the world that you might want to know truthfully,
evolution shape you to have true perceptions of those, what is the probability that you'll have
a payoff function available to you that would actually be able to do that? Right? So this is a
clean mathematical question. The payoff function has to be, when I say has to know the structure,
technically means it has to be a homomorphism of the structure. So there's a technical way for it,
but informally, it just has to know about that structure. And so you can ask, what fraction of
the possible payoff functions know what you need to know to tune you to the world? Are homomorphisms
of the structures of the world? And evolutionary theory, evolutionary game theory, does not a priori
restrict the class of payoff functions. It doesn't say, this is the only class of acceptable
payoff function. It just says, pick a payoff function. So we have to say, okay, we need to put
all payoff functions on the table. If some genius comes along and says, for principled reasons, no,
we need to restrict. Only these payoff functions are the legitimate ones for evolution. We'll deal with
that. But right now, the current state of the scientific theory is any payoff function is fair
game. So you have to, when you're asking the question in current evolutionary theory with
mathematical precision, what is the probability that natural selection will shape any sensory system
of any organism to see some true structure of the world? When you do the math, the answer is
0. Precisely 0. Exactly 0. By the way, when we say something is probability 0, it can happen
infinitely often. So something that's, so this is a little technical, but it's important. Something
that is probability 0 can happen infinitely often, but it's still probability 0. And one way to think
about that very simply is if you think about just a unit square and think about the probability of a
region of the square as the area, right? So if it's a unit square, the whole area is just one. So
the probability of being in the square is just one. If I cut it in half and say left half or right half,
well, now it's half, right? Because it's only half the area. But if I draw a little curve inside the
square, well, that curve has zero area, right? So it has zero probability, but it has an infinite
number of points. So here's a case of something that could happen infinitely often, but it has
probability 0. And so it's in that sense that I'm saying the probability that evolution has shaped
sensory systems to see any aspect of the true structure of reality is precisely 0. No hand wave.
It's a theorem. So do we see reality as it is? According to current evolutionary theory,
absolutely not. As you know, a lot of the guests I sit down with, whether they're physicists,
intelligence officers, people who've worked inside black programs, are operating at a really
impressive level mentally. Sometimes I feel like I'm a chimp talking to human beings. Often their work
takes a toll and a lot of them track their health obsessively. Regular lab work, obscure
biomarkers, often things that most people never look at. Meanwhile, last time I went to a primary
care doctor, they ran maybe like eight biomarkers and they told me I was fine and sent me home.
This massive difference between the ordinary, broken, and limited healthcare system and what
elite people are doing to track their health got me interested in superpower. The beautiful thing is
they make elite level healthcare accessible. They'll literally send a licensed professional to your home,
or you visit a nearby lab. One simple lab test and you get over 100 biomarkers. Heart, liver,
thyroid, hormones, metabolism, vitamin levels, even environmental toxins. After that, their app builds
you a full action plan. Supplement suggestions you can buy directly through them. Nutritional guidance,
lifestyle adjustments. They even give you your true biological age and you can track that over time.
And it's not just a one-time snapshot. Each test builds on the last, so you're actually seeing
progress instead of starting from zero every year. Make this the year you stop guessing about your
health and you start getting serious with superpower. Not only did superpower reduce their price to just
$199. But for a limited time, our listeners get an additional $20 off with code ALCHEMY.
Head to superpower.com and use code ALCHEMY at checkout for $20 off your membership. After you sign up,
they'll ask you how you heard about them, so please make sure to mention American Alchemy to support the
show. We talk about the mind like it's separate from the body, but it's not. Your body is this insanely
intricate system of interconnected processes, and your ability to think clearly is downstream of
that system, that biological system, your God-given body, actually working. One of the most overlooked
inputs of your body's ability to create energy is creatine. It shows up naturally in meat and fish.
Our bodies produce some of it, and it's one of the most studied supplements in human performance.
I've been using other Qualia products for a while, and the reason I trust them is that their formulas
feel like they're actually built by people who understand biological systems. It's a deeply
thoughtful company. I'm a bit of a bio nerd myself, and I can say with confidence that Qualia doesn't
just give you ingredients that sound good on a label, but they think about how these ingredients
are actually absorbed, what has to be activated, and what has to happen downstream for the body to
actually use it. Qualia Creatine Plus combines two clinically studied forms of creatine,
along with electrolytes and magnesium. Electrolytes to support absorption so it reaches the muscles
and brain cells that need it, and magnesium to support activation once it's there.
It's not just creatine, it's the system around creatine. We're way past the dark ages of creatine
just being for gym bros. Creatine is critical for energy, metabolism, cognition, and healthy aging,
not just lifting like a bodybuilder, although it's good for that too. So go to qualialife.com
slash jesse for 50% off. And here's a bonus. Use the code jesse, j-e-s-s-e, for an additional
15% off your order. That's q-u-a-l-i life.com slash jesse and use code jesse. Thank you so much
to Qualia for sponsoring this episode. According to current evolutionary theory,
absolutely not. Probability zero. It's a wild assertion, but it's also an intuitive one that
kind of makes sense. I think a lot of people listening might have the question, okay, so I'm
not seeing reality. Like, I'll take that at face value. That kind of makes sense. How do we then try
to triangulate and figure out what true reality actually is? And what do we do with this theory
that doesn't just instill this radical Cartesian doubt? Obviously, Descartes saying that there might
be this sort of demon who's able to control our perception in this totally 360 way and create the
theater that we see every day. It's a thought experiment that kind of seems like it lines up
with what you're saying. Where in your case, the demon is just evolutionary game theory. And Darwin,
in his case, it was like something with intent, but it's still, it's a, it's a scary thought kind
of an, you know, one is this dog eat dog world thing. And then the other is like this maybe scarier
demon thing, but they're both kind of scary. And so how do we, how do we triangulate what truth is
and what the, what, you know, the actual, so this chair I'm seeing isn't a chair that you're sitting
on. Um, what is it? How do I figure out what it actually is? Well, I think we can do it. We have to be
very, very careful. Uh, this is now where tools of mathematics are going to be very important and,
and very powerful, but it's, it's really important. I think first to really understand
the limitations of our own headset and to understand how we don't see reality as it is.
And I'll give you a fun example. Uh, it's, it's, um, the jewel beetle. Um, it's, it's a beetle
out in the outback of Australia. Um, it's dimpled, glossy and brown and the males fly, the females
are flightless. Uh, the males go fly around looking for females. So this is now, you know, evolution
and reproduction and the whole thing. So when a male finds an eligible female, he alights
and mates and has worked for who knows, you know, tens of thousands, who know, hundreds,
hundreds of thousands of years. But so evolution, you might think has shaped the male beetles
to know what a true female is. They know what a female beetle is. Well, the funny thing is that
there are these, um, beer bottles called stubbies that are dimpled, glossy and brown, and apparently
just the right color. So they, they, some guys, you know, in Australia are drinking them, throw
them out from the outback and drive off. And the male jewel beetles flock to these bottles.
They're dimpled, glossy and just the right color of brown to grab their fancy. And they crawl
all over these bottles. So they have full body contact and they have no idea that this is not
a female. And a lot of women might have something to say about this, but, but yeah, it's just
like, so here, and the, the real females are of no interest. The bottle there, they're just
so it's the male attached to the bottle and forsaking the female for the bottle. And so you
might think, well, what's going on here? You know, they've successfully made it for thousands
of years. What's going on? Well, what happened was evolution gave them a little hack, not,
not the truth, a little hack. A female is anything dimpled, glossy and brown. Apparently the bigger,
the better. And that's it. That, so all you have is a simple little hack, not the truth. And that's
the kind of thing that we see over and over again. I've, I've consulted for a lot of clothing
companies and, and advertising companies, because once you know the hacks, you can use them in
advertising, how to grab attention. So I, so I know a lot of the tricks that the visual system
uses, the shortcuts. What's an example? So, so one example is work that I've done with clothing
companies for jeans. Now it turns out the visual system looks at shading gradients from light to dark
to create a three-dimensional shape. And certain body shapes are obviously going to be more attractive
than others. You know, you know, pancake butt, probably not as good as certain other kinds of
shapes. And so when a gene manufacturer is putting stitching and distress shading on their jeans,
they are telling a three-dimensional story. The only question is, do you know what story you're
telling? And is it the story you want to tell? Because the visual system just is programmed,
the headset is programmed to interpret these cues as a 3D shape. So once you know how the headset
program works, you can play with it. And, and so what happened, I talked with these jeans companies,
actually they came to me, I didn't come to them and because they wanted help.
And so I told them, you're, you are creating a body shape. When a, when a person puts on those
jeans and you've put distress on them, you've put stitching on them and so forth, you are telling
a story. The question is, do you know the story you're telling? And is it the story you want to tell?
And, and so I remember when I showed them their jeans, I took a picture of their jeans and then just
changed the, the, the shading gradient and changed the stitching a little bit to give a little bit more
attractive rear end for the same person wearing it. Right. I remember the, the, the CEO, I won't
mention the company, but the CEO of the company jumping out of his chair, going up to the screen
and, and, and going, our jeans make my butt look bad basically. And, and he looked, he realized
we don't have to do that. We can actually, so I, I, we have a little patent about how to do the
distressing the right way and to get up the stitching because the stitching, the curves in
the stitching, just slight variations in it, tell a big, big story to the visual system about the,
the, the, the construction of your body. And that's a huge cue for the males and females use
in measuring attractiveness. Right. Um, a man that looks a little bit more buff looks good man with
pancake butt, not, not so good. And, and, and similarly for, you know, for women. So, and if
you're, if you're bigger than you want to be, you can make yourself smaller. If you're smaller than
you want to be, you can, you can, in other words, you can make any story you want, given whatever
your body is, you can make any story you want. Doesn't this freak you out for the future? I mean,
that's, it's just, this is going to end up in total dystopia because you have like AI's ability
to synthetically spin up whatever image you want. It, uh, like a deep fake image that looks
like a person. And then you have the, you know, hips to waist ratio is exactly this to make, you
know, the male demographic you're going after more attracted to the thing where the, you know,
the, the butt flattening thing that you're talking about, you feed all that into AI and whatever,
you know, dystopian thoughts we had about Edward Bernays, you know, Freud's nephew who, you know,
helped create Madison Avenue in modern advertising. I mean, this is that on steroids.
That's, that's right. Um, we, we have the power to do that. And the nice thing is that,
of course you can go past the normal to the supernormal to the clown, right? So, so you have
to be at some point, then it gets too much. And then all of a sudden you go, no, no, no, that,
no, this is, this is no longer attractive. It's, it's, it's, it's too super, super normal,
but you could get the AI to take you right up to the max and, and, and put it right there. So,
so yes, that's scary because again, in a, in a world where, you know, corporations are trying
to already hack your, you know, your perceptions, your biases that are, you know, evolutionarily
baked in over thousands of years and you can't really control, uh, you know, if, if we're like
the, the beetle that sees a shiny object, you're like, we need it or whatever. How many times do you
think? I mean, that's gotta be coming, right? Like as soon as we, we, I'm already doing it with,
with companies.
Well, I think you should spend more time on your kind of nature of reality stuff.
Right. Right. No, it's, it's, um, it turns out that when you study human visual attention
as well, so that we've talked about human shape and attractiveness. So there are rules for
attractiveness. Once you understand the rules and then you can play with them,
but there's also rules for grabbing visual attention. And once you know, those rules,
I help companies to have their product on shelves with all the other products. And you can put
certain patterns on your product such that, um, there are, um, I'll give you an example. Yeah. Some
unconscious, unconscious mechanisms, attention mechanisms that you can grab people's attention
and they don't even know what's going on. So it turns out that there, for, for natural reasons,
evolutionarily, we're, we have special circuitry to try to detect animate objects. And for good
reason, right? Those are the ones, the animate objects are the things that could hurt you.
They could kill us.
Yeah. They kill us. Right. Or there are also things you may want to eat. For example, you might,
maybe it's a rabbit or something like that. You know, I'm not today, but in our past.
Some people today, some people today, that's right. So, so it turns out that we have circuitry that
directs attention to animate objects over other things. If there, if you have a big field,
the animate objects will, will pop out and eyes in particular grab attention. There are a particular
feature. And so what you can do and one, what I have done with companies is you can make something
that's I like, but not obviously I like. So the kind of the competition doesn't know that you're
doing it. You put it on your packaging and as you, your eye just goes to that package. You don't know
why. The reason why is because there's, we've tapped into some subcortical hardware that's looking
for animate objects like eyes. We, we grabbed that, grabbed your attention and there's not a literal
eye there, but we know how to grab your attention anyway with a, with that eye program. And so you
see, you see that kind. So that's, that's the kind of level that, that you can take the
understanding of evolution. Once you understand the evolutionary mechanisms, how they're wired into
your brain, your attention system, your attractiveness system, then you can play the system.
Have you ever seen CBS's logo?
Not recently.
It's a big eye.
Yeah. Yeah. Big eye. Well, yeah, right, right, right.
It's adaptive for you to know that you're being watched. There's even a term called scopesthesia,
where statistically it feels like people do know that they're being watched. We were talking
about Rupert Sheldrake before we started rolling.
Yes. Right.
And so that's fascinating.
Yeah. Yeah. Rupert's stuff about being seen from behind. Yeah. Now that's a very different
thing than what I'm talking about, right? This is, this is literally an image, an abstract
image of an eye, whereas Rupert's talking about being, having the sense of
being stared at.
Yeah. And that, in his case, it could be through like, you know, a video camera or like, you
know, it doesn't necessarily need to be an eye, but it would make conventional prosaic sense
in evolutionary biology that if you see an eye, you're going to take notice because if
you're, if you're being watched, obviously that has all sorts of implications if you're
predator or prey.
That's right. And it extends to bodies. So fingers and bodily shapes. So all of these
things can be used cleverly and subtly to move attention around. It's, it's quite, quite
remarkable.
Fascinating. So, so like you're inserting animate objects basically in the advertising. And then
if you're a person walking around, you're like, oh my God. But if you do it subtly, then you'll,
you'll still grab their attention and they won't know why they look there, but, and it probably
won't even, if you, if you're really good at it, it won't even grab, make them think twice.
Oh, I'm just looking at that because I chose to. No, you didn't choose to. We chose to make you
look there.
That's wild. Let's move into more aspirational territory. So, uh, you're saying that you have
mathematically proven that we are actually like a low grade interface when it comes to consciousness
and it would probably be adaptive to have, to be disembodied and that most of the universe is
probably teeming with disembodied, disincarnate life. Is that roughly right?
Yes, but there's a long way to go to explain that because that, that, as you, you, the claim
is true, but there's a lot to, to go to explain what's, what's going on there. So first we have
to think about the current state of science. Right now our best scientific theories are physicalist
theories. We assume that space and time are fundamental. Uh, we, you know, Einstein's general
theory of relativity and that, um, objects inside space and time are fundamental particles, quantum
fields. And in, in that framework, um, what I just, you know, what you said wouldn't, wouldn't hold,
right? But what we have to do then is look at the current scientific framework and there's a problem
with it. The problem is the nature of observation. So one of the biggest problems in quantum theory is,
is the so-called measurement problem. And the problem there is, um, evolution of states of
systems seems to follow one rule, the Schrodinger evolution, when you're not looking and a different
rule when you look at the so-called collapse. The, the act of observing a system somehow seems to be
important in, in the evolution that you see. So Schrodinger evolution, when you're not looking
collapse, when you look, there's no, that, that idea has been around for literally a century,
a century. Yeah. Literally, I think it was literally, it was 1927 or something. Yeah. 1926 was
Schrodinger. So 1926 Schrodinger evolution, I think 25 for Heisenberg's, but, but right.
So it's been about a century and there is no satisfactory solution to this so-called measurement
problem and quantum. There are proposals, but none universally accepted and all of them have
serious problems and I'm happy to talk about them and their problems, but. Well, even the Copenhagen
interpretation is so, it's just saying that the measurement like collapses the, you know, the wave
function into an eigenstate or whatever, what does that mean? And, and, and it, I always find it so
interesting that you have these like pop quantum physics people now, like, you know, Sean Carroll,
who, by the way, I'm a big fan of his books. I think he's amazing. But, um, these, you know,
Neil deGrasse Tyson, some of these people will like definitively say things like, oh, when particles
collide, they collapse into an eigenstate or the, you know, uh, the quantum detector is what's collapsing
the wave function into an eigenstate. And I think it's totally unfalsifiable. What if the superposition
of the observation exists in the quantum detector and then your interface, your conscious interface
is collapsing that? Like, we can't say that definitively. There's no way to, to, to know exactly
what's collapsing the wave function. So it's, it's all faith-based assertions.
Well, and, and the, the key problem at the core of this whole issue is that we don't have a notion
of an observer and the process of observation. That's what's missing. And if you think about it,
that's not a minor point. What is science? Science is the systematic gathering of data through
observations. We call them experiments. We systematically observe the world. And then
based on our observations, we write down mathematical theories about what we think are the structures of
the world. And we hope that somehow it's legitimate to think that our observations give us the kind of
information that we would need to write down useful, perhaps accurate theories about the structure
of the world. But for this whole thing to work, observation has to somehow genuinely inform
our theories of the world. So the question is how, what is observation? Why should we believe
that human observations will genuinely give us the kind of data we need to come up with legitimate
theories about the world? That's a non-trivial question. And to date, science cannot answer that
question. So what we have is this really interesting situation where we know that observers are not
unimportant. They're central. And we don't have a theory.
They're unremovable.
They're unremovable. Without observers, there is no science. And there's no reason to believe
our theories. And our theories...
But that's not the current. The current paradigm is that we live in this materialist,
reductionist world where our consciousness and we are happy accidents of atoms that happenstance
bounced off of one another and coalesced into these conscious agents or whatever. This emergence
is this popular term today.
Right. And so what we'd have to do then in that story, what you have to do is to show how
that account could still lead to some notion of an observer that could give you data that would
legitimately constrain theories about the nature of reality. And no one has done that yet. There's no
accepted theory. So there's the measurement problem in quantum mechanics. And then there's also the
problem in studying just human observations, where we're trying to say, okay, human observations,
like I'm observing that I'm tasting water or something like that. So that's an observation.
I'm tasting water. And we're trying to come up with, okay, a physiological description of the brain
and brain activity that would give me the necessary and sufficient conditions to say,
that was an observation of Hoffman drinking water. It was Hoffman observing drinking water.
We've been at this for decades, actually for longer than that, but seriously for several decades,
trying to understand how we could explain human observations, like colors, tastes, smells,
and human observations in terms of either functional properties of some kind of network,
computer network or whatever, or neural network properties of the human brain or something like
that, or microtubules, collapsing of microtubules, or integrated information patterns and so forth.
We've been trying to give a theory about observation. And I know that the people who are doing that,
they're brilliant. They're my friends. We're buddies. And there's not a single specific observation
that they can account for, like the taste of mint or the smell of chocolate or something like that.
So you're trying to apply math to literal human experience.
That's right, because that's the foundation of science. If we do not have a human observation,
we have no data for scientific theories.
I agree. Not only that, but you have collapse of the quantum wave function. There's no way to even know
which eigenstate, which particular state gets picked. That's all based on probabilities.
Right, right.
And so there's no way to predict, let alone some subjective experience of water or seeing a color
or an animal or whatever. That feels way above our pay grade. We don't even know about the position
and momentum of an atom or a subatomic particle, an electron or something.
I completely agree. And I should point out that what I'm saying here is prior to the issue of consciousness.
So there are colleagues of mine who say that conscious experiences are an illusion.
It's, you know, they're a construct of the brain.
And that's perfectly fine. If you want to say that, that's perfectly fine with me.
There's the attention schema theory, for example, that says this.
But then the question is, okay, we're interested in science, not just hand waves.
So I want a specific, mathematically precise attention schema for the illusion of the taste
of chocolate or the illusion of the smell of chocolate or whatever it might be.
So I'm a hard-nosed scientist. I want to understand the foundations of observation because it's the
foundation of science and call it, call the, forget consciousness, just call them, you know,
consciousness is an illusion. Fine. I still need to understand how observations work. So how
exactly does the illusion get done? And the answer is there is zero on the table. There is not a single
scientific theory about the illusion of mint or the taste of chocolate. So we're nowhere on. This
is really, it's stunning. Here it is, 2026. And we have no theory of observation. And observation is
the foundation of everything that we can do in science. And what we need is a theory of observation
that's not only precise, but that gives us, that will lead to theories that say that our understanding
of observation does the right thing because we need coherence, right? Whatever our story about
observation is, it has to be coherence and say that, oh yeah, this theory does allow that that
observation gave you legitimate data to build the theory.
So how do you think observation works?
So I think that if we start inside a physicalist framework, we're not going to, we're not going
to close that loop. I think for a couple of reasons, but I think there's logical problems,
but, but also I know the players in the field, they're brilliant. I mean, they're, they're really
brilliant. These are smart, smart people. Um, they're coming up empty. I, when I tried to do it,
I come up completely empty. I just think it's, it's not going, going to work. Someone can easily
prove me wrong by giving one, but right now there's nothing on the table.
I think we're in the stone age on it. I don't see how with math, which is so primitive,
how you could ever come to encapsulate something so kind of visceral. And I'm not using multi-dimensional
in a scientific way, but multi-dimensional as like just experience, everyday experience
seems to, you know, it's even like, think about neuroscience, you know, which I obviously
you're well-versed in. You have these disparate pathways of, you know, speech and reading
comprehension and, you know, uh, auditory listening. And then you have this binding
problem. And so that, that's even like, that's even, you can barely explain the pathways with
math. You can't. So then, then why can, then we can't, we have the binding problem where we can't
explain the seamless perception of experience. So, uh, you know, at an even lower level, like,
you know, I can, how can we explain everyday experience with math? I just think we're,
you know, going to be in the dark for a long time there.
Right. And so there, there are two problems I think you're pointing to here. One is that
the math could be very, very complicated. The neuroscience is very, very complicated. So,
so maybe, you know, that complexity itself is just standing in the way, but, and I agree,
but I think in addition, there, there is a principled problem. I think that, that you,
you, if you don't start with observation, you're not going to get it out of your theory. Now,
this is something that Leibniz suggested back in 1700. He had this monodology and, and
Leibniz proposed that the fundamental furniture of the universe are these monads, which were observing
entities. And so there were a bunch of these different kinds of observers and they were all
linked together with what he called a pre-established harmony. So, so there was observation and then
there was some structure binding all these observers together. But we didn't really have
the math. I mean, we had Newton's math. We could do, you know, time evolution theories, you know,
and differential equations and so forth. So we, we did what we could. Leibniz had this idea,
but he didn't have, he had the math that could do the Einstein, I'm sorry, the Newton kind of thing,
but he couldn't, you know, they didn't have the math, the probabilistic math that we really needed
to do his, his thing. And more recently, you know, John Wheeler, a very, very famous physicist,
worked on gravity, black, he invented the term black hole. He was, you know, Feynman's,
Richard Feynman's advisor. He was in the who's who of, of, of physics. He came to the realization
later in his career that somehow we had to start with what he called observer participants,
that somehow the observer was really a critical notion that we were missing. And he felt that once
we got that notion down, got it really rigorous, that we could then build up our, our, our physics
from that. And so, and I agree with Wheeler. I think that, so he had this very famous paper in 1989,
it's called the it from bit paper, informally, the it from bit, that somehow it's information of
some kind that you get from observation that's going to be used to construct what we call the
physical world. And I think that he's onto something and I've been pursuing the very, very same
thing. So I've been looking for 40 years for a mathematical model of the observer as foundational.
And actually, you know, Wheeler cited my work in his, his it from bit paper.
Really?
So I've got a book called, so I've been after this. So this is not a new gig for me. I've been,
I published a book in 1989 called Observer Mechanics with Bruce Bennett and Chaitan Prakash,
two mathematicians. And so, you know, I've been after this observer thing, not just this last week or
two, it's been 45 years I've been after. And so Wheeler cited that book as an example of the kind of
thing to, to start to pursue. And then I've, I've been, I've continued to pursue it because it's,
it's a deep problem. And now I, just in the last two years, you know, so it's not like we just
started, but in the last two years, we've really had a breakthrough that I can tell you about where
we start with the notion of observer, we can make it rigorous, and then we can start to ask,
how do we build space-time as a headset? And then start to explain all these other weird phenomena
that we were talking about earlier. Well, I want to get into that to tell me about it.
Right. So, so the basic idea is very, very simple. What's the, what's the simplest idea that you could
possibly have about an observer? Well, an observer has certain outcomes and experiences that it could
have, like maybe red, green, and blue, just to be very, very simple. I'm at a traffic light. So red,
green, and yellow, see? Red, green, and yellow. That's, those are my experiences. And then,
so there's a list of the experiences. For humans, it's in the trillions. We have trillions of
experiences that we could have, but, but we don't, we can think about simple observers that have,
you know, three. And then the other thing is to say they change. I'm seeing red now,
I'm at the traffic light. I'll, I might see green a second from now. And then after that,
I might see yellow in a, in a, in a minute or something. So there are experiences and then
they change. Those are my, that's it. That's all I want to assume. And the question is,
what is the most sort of simple, general mathematical thing that you could write down
to just say there are experiences that change? It's something called a Markov matrix. And it's just
literally, um, you write down a matrix of numbers. If I see red now, what's the probability that I'll
see red at the next instant or green or yellow? So three numbers and you have to add up to one
because it's a probability. Then the next row is, you have, I'm seeing red now, I'm sorry,
yellow, yellow now. What's the probability of seeing, you know, red, green, and yellow,
and so forth? You just know three by three matrix of, of numbers. That's it. And that's going to be
our theory of observation, that there are, so there are millions of different matrices,
countless matrices. Each one, I'm thinking about the states of the matrix as, as observer outcomes
or experiences. You can think about as conscious experiences if you wish, or if you don't believe
in consciousness, you can just say observer outcomes, whichever, you know, mathematics doesn't
care what you're going to say on that. I personally think about them as conscious experiences,
and we can talk about why, but someone who doesn't want to do that, the math is just the math.
And then the idea is that you can just do one little addition to the matrix that's standard
in mathematics has been done for many, many decades, which is to just add and counter.
So every time my experience updates, my counter increments. One experience, two experiences,
three, just that drop dead simple. Just I'm counting the number of experiences that I have,
one after the other. We'll call those enhanced Markov chains. So now suppose I have a big,
well, I'll keep it simple. My little three by three Markov chain, red, green, and yellow. I'm at the
traffic light. What is, but suppose that for some reason I put on glasses that don't let me see yellow.
I can only see red and green. That's all I can see. Well, so I'm still sitting at the same traffic
light, but I can only see red and green. I can't see the yellow anymore. I'm going to get a certain
pattern of red and green transitions that, that is induced by the red, green, and yellow trends.
Right? So it won't be, the probability is going from red to green now with just, you know, with
these glasses on is going to be slightly different than red to green when I had, because yellow could
have happened in there between as well. Right? So now the probabilities are going to be a little bit
different, but they're going to be determined by the bigger matrix. Right? So the three by three matrix
has the numbers that tell you what's happening. If I can only see the red and green subset,
I will get a new matrix and it'll be slightly different because I can't see the yellow,
but it will be a unique matrix. Okay. That's called the trace. So this is just a standard
idea in Markov chain theory that goes back many, many decades. It's not me. It's a beautiful formula
that's been known. And I can, if we want to get into the weeds, we can actually do the formula. It's
a really interesting formula, but there's a mathematical formula called the trace.
That's been known. So that's not news. It's the zero surprise description of what you will see.
So if I, if this big matrix is what's governing the reality, so to speak, and I can only see this
sub window, then the trace is the zero surprise, correct answer of what you're going to see. You
will not be surprised. That is the frequency. Those are the frequencies that you will see.
What I discovered two years ago was that the relationship of being a trace
gives a logic on the set of all Markov chains. That was, that was the mind blowing
discovery. And it was, what was stunning to me is it was so simple and no one had ever done it before.
And I, I, so I took it. I'm not a mathematician. I know enough math to get into trouble and not
enough to get out, but I'm working with mathematicians like Chaitan Prakash and, and, and others that can
get me out of trouble. So I took it to Chaitan. I said, look, Chaitan, I think this thing is a
logic, but technically a partial order. And he said, Don, it's, it's too pretty to be true.
And he had to fly somewhere. So he got to Heathrow and decided to check in and he proved it. It's a
partial order. So what we have is that this operation of minimal surprise windows. So I have a big,
I have all these Markov windows and I can ask what are the, the no surprise sub windows.
That turns into a logic. You can talk about the and the, or the negation, the, the meat and the
join and so forth. Um, it turns out the logic is not Boolean. It's a non, it's a very non-trivial,
non-Boolean logic, but it's locally Boolean. If I pick any matrix and look at all of its sub matrices
in the trace, they form a Boolean logic. So it's nice to the non-computer scientists,
what Boolean, right. So for computer scientists, Boolean is, is, you know, very, very obvious,
but a Boolean logic is in some sense, the simplest logic. You can take two elements
and take, if you, if I have two elements, I can take their union. So I can take an element,
which is their union. Um, and I can also take their intersection. I can find an element,
which is, you know, you know, in both, in both of them. And I can take the negation. I can say,
what's not, you know, what's the, the outside of this, this element. So Boolean logic is at the
foundation of a lot of, of classical computing, um, stuff. So the thing, this logic is locally
Boolean, um, is globally non-Boolean. And it, so the idea then I'll connect it with Leibniz first
a little bit. The idea here is that each matrix is an observer window. It's a way of seeing.
And so it's a monad in Leibniz's terminology. And the trace logic is the pre-established harmony.
That's, that ties them all together. That shows a logic of the whole set of observer windows. Now,
these matrices can get as big as you want. They can go to a trillion,
off to infinity in any direction. And so there's, there's no top to this. There isn't. So it's,
it's an incredibly complicated logic. So if you just make, allow the matrix to get as big as,
as you want, the entries can change anyway, every possible arrangement of entries, as long as the,
each row sums to one, it counts. So this is a huge, huge space of observers.
And the, and the single logic that ties them all together that says, this is the no surprise logic
of all observation. So these, this gives you all possible observations and the no surprise logic.
And we're still, we still don't understand all the details of this logic. It's,
we don't have a general formula for the, the union, the join. We can, we've,
Chaitan has a formula in special cases where he can compute the join. We don't have a general
formula for the join. We don't actually have a theorem yet that you can actually write down
a general formula for the join. So it's going to be really, so there's some interesting open
mathematical problems here. Now that's, so that's, but now we can take it one more step.
Those are just observer windows. There's no notion of agency yet.
For agency, we can step back and say, what would it mean? What would an agent want to do? Well,
one thing an agent would want to do is if I'm looking through this observer window,
maybe I want to look through a bigger one or a smaller one, or just a different one. I want
to change my observer windows. So how would I do that? Well, I would want to write down
another matrix where it says, if I'm looking at this observer window, what's the probability that
I'll go to that one or that one or that one, or if I'm looking at this observer window?
So what am I going to do? I'm going to write down another Markov matrix.
So I'll have another, so I've got this trace logic of observer windows. It's infinite. It's huge.
Now I'm stepping outside of it and I'm putting a new kind of Markov chain on top of the whole trace
logic, right? I'm now walking around on the trace logic of observer windows. So there's a trace
logic of observer windows. I can now step, I'm going to go meta now. I'm stepping outside of that.
I'm walking around on those windows, right? And how do I do it? I use Markov chains to walk around
on those windows. Each way that I could walk around is a, what I'll call a policy. It's an agent policy,
a very simple one, but a policy. I can look now at the collection of all policies.
They're all of, and they have a logic that ties them all together. What is that logic?
It's the trace logic again, recursion. So now I have the trace logic of policies. And now I can say,
I want to go meta again. I can now crawl around. I had this policy. Now I want to change this policy.
I'm going to crawl around the windows this way. And so I can have meta policies. So what I can do,
and the meta policies will then have their own trace logic. And this goes off. So the notion
of agency can be built out recursively, as complicated as you want. So the whole thing
comes down to, there are observers with things that they can see. They change. That means there's
a logic. If you write down Markov chain, it means there is a logic. We just discovered there is a logic.
You can then crawl around on the logic. That means you now have agency. It has its own trace logic.
So the whole thing comes down to Markov chains and the trace logic, recursion. That's it. It couldn't
be simpler. It's unbelievably simple. And you recursively build out this notion of agency. And now
the magic starts happening. Because when you take a trace, if I have a big window and you're looking
at a sub-window, in terms of the little window, there's stuff going on outside that the little
window doesn't see. But it's all coordinated because of this trace logic. And so magic can
happen outside there. So notice what happens with the time counters. If I've got a bigger window,
say, go back to our red, green, and yellow. Every time red, green, or yellow changes, my counter goes.
If I only see red and green, my counter isn't going to change as fast because I'm not seeing
the yellow. So all the yellow counts that the bigger guy has, I'm not getting with my red,
green guy. He only sees red and green. So his counter is going slower. That will lead to time
dilation and special relativity.
Really?
And general relativity. Exactly. It leads right to that.
It predicts time dilation.
So the idea, and we're working on this. So this is where my team is working on.
Which is observer dependent time dilation.
Completely. So that's where it comes from. That's the claim.
Wow.
And when you look at how do you get distance, the distance comes from how, roughly,
if I start at red, how quickly do I get to green? How quickly do I get to yellow?
It's sort of a diffusion. If I'm at red, do I get to green really quickly? Do I get to yellow
very quickly? Especially if you have a bigger matrix, when you have thousands and thousands
of states. Maybe there's lots of places to go. How quickly do I get to diffuse?
There's something called Dirichlet forms that come out of this. But the basic idea is the speed at
which you get from one state to another, or the way you diffuse, gives you a distance.
And when you have a bigger matrix, and then you take a smaller trace, the distances get smaller.
So you get not only time dilation, you get length contraction from this. So you get,
so the idea is, and we're working on proving that we can actually get special and general
relativity exactly as headset representations of this trace logic.
So that's going to be, but then we have this whole notion of that there's going to be hidden stuff.
I'm not the top observer, right? None of us are, my headset is just a headset.
There are bigger matrices out there. That means that if someone is working with a bigger matrix,
and I'm just a sub-matrix of what they're doing, they can do magic. They can do things that look
like magic to me. It's completely legitimate in their framework. But in my framework,
for example, something that in my framework looks instantaneous could be a million years in their
framework. So this is when we get to the UAP kind of stuff, where the craft seems to be here,
and then it goes Mach 40 instantly and gets over there. And to me, it happened like, who knows? In
their headset, it may have been a very leisurely movement, because I'm only seeing a trace. My
counter is only going very, very slow compared to their counters. So I mean, I'm a plaything perhaps
to them, because it's sort of like me and the ant. I can take my time. If I want to smash the ant,
no rush. I got plenty of time. The ant doesn't know I'm coming. I can do it. So as soon as you
have a bigger matrix and someone's just a trace, you can play with them. That's the interesting thing
here. So all of a sudden, this opens up all sorts of windows for exploration.
Well, it makes me think that maybe, you know, on some local level, it might be adaptive not to see
the truth because, you know, fitness beats perception and all these sort of local evolutionary
game theory kind of, you know, dynamics. But if you're talking about observer windows as basically
your ability to see reality, if like the, you know, the larger your matrix, the larger,
the bigger reality you're seeing on some meta level, it is adaptive to see as much truth as
possible, especially if, you know, you're the aliens and you can just like play with us little
humans. That's right. So yeah, there is. So you might want to have a policy in which you are going
to bigger and bigger windows. The problem is there's never a top here. There is no top to this trace
logic. There is no such thing as the biggest window.
So it's an infinitely kind of scale of consciousness.
That's right. This is saying consciousness goes off to infinity, not in just one direction,
in an infinite number of different directions. So you can't even think big enough about this.
Consciousness is far more from the trace logic is saying consciousness is incredibly complicated.
And no matter how big you think you are, there's no way that you're the top.
Yeah. Any headsets you're wearing is trivial compared to literally trivial. Any headsets
that you're wearing is trivial compared to what's available.
Yeah. It's interesting. Um, Sam Altman of open AI, I think he had a tweet and it was like,
uh, physics is a product or he said it was something like intelligence is a product of physics.
And I wanted to flip it and say physics is a product of intelligence. And I think you would
agree with me. Well, absolutely. So physics are our current space time physics is one of the more
trivial headsets that you can build out of the trace logic. And a lot in physics points to this
idea that we are computationally sort of, uh, processing it. And, uh, Wheeler would talk about
this. So he was big on the anthropic principle, not only it from bit, which is basically if you
take that one logical step further, it's sort of like we're computing reality. I mean, that's
if you're using computer science as an analogy, you don't have to go all the way to like Wolfram
physics to say that, like, you know, he might have some information theory, adjacent ideas about
physics itself, but he would also talk about the anthropic principle of which there are, you know,
variations, the weak and the strong, but why is, you know, why is the plank length and plank scale
the way it is? Why, um, you know, uh, uh, does hydrogen and oxygen bond in this perfect way where
normally, you know, solids are more dense than the liquid form of, you know, any sort of substance.
And in our case, and, you know, in the earth would flood a million times over if, if that were the case
with us, but in ice with water, with H2O, you know, it, it forms these perfect crystal lattice
structures. So the ice floats above the water. Uh, you know, if gravity were slightly different,
you know, we wouldn't have our, you know, our earth the way it is. So it, it feels like
you could, you could have two different, you know, sort of conclusions based on that. One is we like
rolled the dice a million different times and we got this really lucky with earth. Like it's this
Goldilocks principle, or you could say that physics itself is just our interface. And,
you know, the reason these constants, these physics constants are so perfect is because
they're actually derivative of our own consciousness, which that, that makes way more sense to me.
And it may, it's the Occam's razor explanation. There are other things in physics like Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, which point to this as well, where, you know, if you can't measure position
and momentum at the same time simultaneously, that almost looks like a computational caching
function. Like you can only store so much information in local memory. You also have
the Sheldrake observations, which we both agreed before we were rolling, we might have problems
with the Sheldrake theory, but as an empirical, you know, experimentalist, I think he's very strong.
And all of his stuff points, you know, you'll grow a crystal lattice structure in a Petri dish,
and it takes a long time to grow the first time. And then it grows much, much faster after you've
grown it that first time, which to me points to sort of it, you know, in computer science, again,
you have a central monad, in this case, it would be the server, and then you'd have different
observational nodes. And so it would take a lot, a long time to upload information longer than it would
to download it thereafter. Upload times are always longer than download times. So you can go on and
on, you can talk about golden ratios and Fibonacci sequences. What if those are sort of the code
chunks of, you know, our reality, so to speak. And the simulation theory thing just gets more and
more charismatic. And it's impossible to argue with. And I, you know, I'm not a huge fan of Nick
Bostrom, to be honest, but his arguments around the simulation theory are impossible to argue. You
can't really say for certain that this is base reality. So, so this is really interesting because
it's an update that actually discusses a heuristic that will allow you to predict human observation,
observations. I think a lot of people, you know, listening to what you just said about the
red, green, blue, you know, example with the traffic lights might be thinking, okay, Don,
that's a very narrow rule set. How do we get to, you know, like I'm tasting a hamburger. It's like
this 360 sensory experience. How do you get, how do you build a Markov matrix that really encapsulates
that? Right. So, yeah, you've raised a lot of interesting points there. I'll, one of them
about the computational aspect of this. Markov chains are computationally universal. Anything that you can
do with the universal Turing machine, you can do with Markov chains. So there's no restriction.
on with Markov chains. So, and in fact, I think that they're beyond just computational.
One interesting thing to explore here is that the trace logic on Markov chains,
therefore induces a logic on algorithms, right? And it's a new logic on algorithms. I'm starting to
explore it. So this may be a new contribution to the theory of computation, that there is a logic,
and it's a very interesting logic. So the trace logic on Markov chains, when you think about Markov
chains as algorithms, it induces a logic on algorithms that gives us a new aspect of the
theory of computation. That's going to be very, very interesting. So Wolfram's computational
approach is subsumed within the Markov chain approach. In fact, any, any computational approach
is, is subsumed in it. Also, when you get one objection to this Markov thing, you said it's
too simple and we need to go more complicated. Absolutely. A lot of people will say it's too
simple. So for example, one, one objection has been, look, qualia or conscious experiences are private.
And I can't, I can't, you can't know my experience of green and I can't know your experience of green
directly. I can guess, but I can't know. And, and so people, some people say, well, in quantum theory,
we have the no cloning theorem so that the, if you have a quantum state, it can't be cloned.
And a lot of people say, well, we need that, right? You know, to, to, to get this privacy of qualia
kind of thing going on here, we need to have the notion, we need to at least go to the quantum
level because we have this no cloning theorem, right? To, to, to, to model that. Well, it turns
out if you look more closely at the no cloning theorem and quantum theory, it doesn't determine,
it's not, it does not depend on the unitarity of the Schrodinger evolution. It's only linearity.
That's all you need is linearity. Markov operators are linear. And it turns out the Markov, if you're,
if you're interested in the no cloning theorem and you think that has something to do with
consciousness, Markov chains have the no cloning theorem too. So that's, that's not, that's not
nothing to dismiss. Now, another thing in quantum theory is people will say, well, still Markov chains
aren't unitary. I mean, some of them are, but most of them aren't. And so you have all this weird
behavior in quantum theory that you don't have in Markov chains. So what are you talking about here?
When you say not unitary.
So, so unitary effectively in quantum theory, Schrodinger's equation, it runs the same forward
and backwards in time, basically. So it's, it's, it's, it's time reversible, so to speak. Whereas,
for example, the problem with measurement is that that's not time reversible. Once you collapse,
you know, going from the Schrodinger evolution to, I got this particular experience that you,
that's not reversible, that's, that's an irreversible collapse. So that's been the problem
that you, in, in, in quantum theory, if you say that every physical system is governed by the
Schrodinger evolution. And most, um, most would say that, right? That every physical system is
governed by the Schrodinger evolution. Now I want a physical system that collapses the wave
function, and namely a physical system that observes, that makes a measurement. Well, there's
no physical system governed by the Schrodinger equation that can do that. So that's the problem.
The, the, the observation problem is we have no way of saying a physical system can do this,
right? That's the, that's the real serious problem that we've got there. And when you go then to
attempts to deal with this. So when you say there is no physical system,
because every physical system is governed by the Schrodinger evolution, therefore it can't
collapse the wave function. Now, someone will say, well, you know, Don, you, you've let go of
decoherence. I mean, you've forgotten about decoherence, right? If you, you can decoher,
decoher things and, and, and go, go classical. And decoherence does not actually lead to the
collapse. So decoherence will lead you, it will get rid of the interference, but it will not give
you a single outcome. It will give you, um, a panoply of outcomes, but not a single outcome. So
decoherence does not actually solve the measurement problem. It does get rid of the interference,
but that's, but not, doesn't give you the outcome. So right now that's been the big problem.
So what you're saying is it's, it's fundamentally observation.
The observation cannot be captured by any system that's governed by the Schrodinger equation.
Sure.
And it cannot be captured by decoherence. And that means.
Yeah. The only person who would try to really attempt to solve this is the Penrose hammer off
the idea that decoherence occurs in the brain at the sort of one graviton limit. And this,
there's a space time superposition buildup and then you get the collapse or whatever,
like the brain is some physical quantum, you know, system or whatever.
Well, yeah, I'm good friends with hammer off and, and the, I think it's a really interesting idea.
Of course, Penrose's physics is unassailable. I mean, he's, he's, he's a genius, but in terms
of his application here, uh, I don't think it's going to work because what you have is still,
they're not proposing a theory of the collapse. They don't know how the collapse happens. That
they're just going to say that the collapse happens. That's, that's a miracle. The, and
consciousness like the tubulin are vibrating, you know, a lot. And then in the microtubules,
and then there's some sort of, you know, that, that, that's right. The tubulin molecule has
certain properties that allow collapse to happen, but, but, but they still don't, you know,
have any physical system to do the collapse. That's, it's just a raw plant. It collapses.
It's just some refractory period of space-time superposition buildup, which allows for free
will and then somehow collapse. Yeah. Basically from my, my view is that, you know, um, there's
two miracles here. There's, you know, there's collapse is a miracle and consciousness is a
miracle. Let's call them the same thing. Right. That's, that's fair enough. Yeah. And, and,
and I'm good friends with Stuart. And when I ask him, you know, Stuart, okay. You know,
quantum states of microtubules and their collapse gives us conscious experiences. Okay. Well,
give me one. What's the orchestrated collapse of quantum states that must be the taste of chocolate
or the illusion of the taste of chocolate. If someone wants to say, I'm not interested in the
hard problem of consciousness, fine. Forget the hard problem of consciousness. I want the illusion
of the taste of chocolate or the illusion. And there's nothing on the table. So, so again,
if they put something on the table, that's a different story, but there's nothing on the table.
You, with your Markov matrixes, you can predict subjective experience as radical as tasting
chocolate. Well, so, so I'm changing the game. Okay. So what I'm doing is I'm saying, instead of
assuming that the fundamental reality is non-conscious, non-perceptual, it's a physical
world. Let's start with a different set of assumptions. Let's just take the taste of mint,
the smell of garlic, the feeling of a headache as the primitives. See, every scientific theory
starts with assumptions. This is a really important point. This is basic, but it's really important.
And a lot of scientists miss a key point here. Every scientific theory says, please grant me these
assumptions. Like Einstein, grant me that the speed of light is the same in all reference frames
and the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames. If you grant me that, then I can give you
special relativity. And with other assumptions, I can give you general relativity. So every theory
starts with assumptions. And then if you grant those assumptions, it says, I can explain all this
other wonderful stuff. What a theory never does is explain its own assumptions. It assumes them.
So that theory, if you give me a theory, I can tell you that theory isn't a theory of everything
because it's not a theory of its own assumptions. It's assuming its assumptions. You say, oh, that's
no problem. I'll give you a deeper theory eventually that explains those assumptions. Absolutely. That's
what science is about. I'm all for it. And your new theory will have its own assumptions. And so this
goes on ad infinitum forever. There is no such thing as a theory of everything in science. And in fact,
we are going to be always 0% of the way to a theory of everything. So I'm a scientist. I love
science. And science, by its very nature, will get 0% of reality because every scientific theory
starts with assumptions. So humility is absolutely essential when we do science. Now, when we have a
scientific theory, when we write down our assumptions, we do not need to assume that our
assumptions are true. If we did, we'd be stuck. All we need to do is assume that our assumptions are
consistent. And given that, then we can look at all the things that follow consistently from our
assumptions. So that's what science assumes. It says, grant me these assumptions. I believe they're
consistent. You can check me, but I think these assumptions are consistent. Given that they're
consistent, there's this realm of explanation. It's not universal. It's 0% of reality, but there
is a scope of explanation if it's a good theory. And so you can then say, let's explore the scope of
this theory. A good theory will give you the mathematical tools you need to explore its scope.
A great scientific theory will give you the tools to discover its limits, to be precise about its
limits. And that's a key point that many scientists and philosophers miss. So I'm making the clean point
that a scientific theory starts with assumptions that are not necessarily assumed to be true. They're just
assumed to be consistent. They will necessarily have a limited scope, not universal scope.
And they will have hard limits to explanation. It is not self-contradictory to say that that
scientific theory could also tell you what its own limits are with some precision. So in the case of
Einstein's theory of space-time, together with quantum mechanics, quantum field theory,
and Einstein's gravity, it's a great theory, great scope. All the technology around is because of it.
So incredible scope. Clean limits. And the theory itself tells you the limits of its fundamental
assumptions. The assumption that space-time. So space-time is fundamental. Einstein's theory,
together with quantum field theory, tells us that that assumption that space-time is fundamental
falls apart precisely at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
Game over for space-time.
Is that the Planck scale?
It's the Planck scale. So the notion of space-time has no operational meaning at the Planck scale.
Yeah.
It's over.
And it's a theory of gravity, and gravity breaks down at subatomic scale.
That's right. And it falls apart. So it is clear that space-time isn't the story. It's a beautiful
story. It's not the final story. And science has to move beyond space-time. Now, by the way...
So you're saying you have a theory that is upstream of, but encapsulates space-time and
Einstein. And one example of that is the prediction of time dilation.
And length contraction.
Right.
Does anything else in general relativity get predicted by your theory?
It looks like the quantum wave functions come out of this as the asymptotic behavior of the
Markov chains. So I've talked about Markov chain as sort of a step-by-step thing. Now I see red,
now I see green, and now I see yellow, and so forth. That's just to make it clear. But now suppose,
think about that as frames of a movie. And I've been looking with you at one frame at a time,
say, look at that frame, look at that. Now I play the movie. Now, of course, that's a different
perception. Now I'm playing the movie. The frames are going by real fast. That's what I sort of mean
intuitively by the asymptotic behavior. And what my collaborator, Shaitan Prakash, has shown in
certain cases, and I think it's quite general, is that the quantum wave functions for free particles
are precisely the same thing as the asymptotic behavior of these enhanced Markov chains. Technically,
they're certain eigenfunctions. So the harmonic functions. So harmonic functions of the enhanced
Markov chains have exactly the same mathematical format as the wave functions in quantum mechanics
for free particles. So the idea will be that quantum theory is coming out of this more general theory of
trace logic and Markov chains as an asymptotic description. The trace logic is giving you
in some sense a hidden variables theory. So it's a hidden variables theory.
Like a David Bohm.
Well, it's different from Bohm because Bohm has a single physical particle riding the waves,
right, of quantum theory.
Like a de Broglie pilot wave.
That's right. So we're completely, I mean, I have great respect for Bohm. He was brilliant,
drop dead brilliant. And he did some really out of the box thinking, but the pilot wave theory is
still tied to space-time. Later, Bohm thought outside of space-time, deeply outside of space-time,
but his pilot wave thing is really still stuck in space-time.
So when you say hidden variable, what do you mean?
A hidden variable theory of quantum mechanics is just any theory that says there's something that
quantum mechanics is not telling you about reality. There's a deeper level of reality
that we need to go to. And there are limits. I mean, there are theorems about what you can put
outside of that reality, outside of quantum mechanics in your reality. So there are certain
things you can't do. So we have a bunch of theorems to prove based on this. So this is all new stuff.
So I'll say what we have to do. We have to prove that we can get special relativity out of this.
Prove that we can get curved space-time, Einstein's theory of gravity. Prove that we can get the Born
rule of quantum theory out of this. Prove that we can model the Big Bang. Prove that we can get
Heisenberg uncertainty relationship. And a number of other things. Prove that we get non-locality
and so forth. So we're assembling a team right now of mathematicians. We have all these conjectures
that we've put out publicly, conjectures about that. And we're getting a team to work on them
one by one. So that's where we are right now. It's quite fun.
That's fascinating. Wow. Very cool.
Right. So it's not a hand wave. There are mathematicians working this put-up or shut-up time.
So you are trying to create, establish essentially a new theory of everything while acknowledging
the limits of theories of everything. But that exists kind of upstream of both general
relativity, special relativity, and quantum mechanics.
Exactly right.
And as of now, you can predict in general relativity, length contraction and time dilation. And then
if you speed up the frames, you can predict-
Quantum wave function, Schrodinger's, something like Schrodinger's equation.
That's right.
That's remarkable. That's really cool.
But we now need theorems and proofs on all that stuff. But it's looking quite promising
to me and to a bunch of people who are willing to spend their time to work on this now.
Would you be able to devise an experiment that the hidden Markov chain could predict the result for?
And then you do the experiment in real life. And, you know, only this sort of theory is the proper
heuristic to predict it. General relativity and quantum mechanics are too limited to predict this outcome.
That would be the direction we want to go. We first want to show first that we can get exactly the
predictions of special-
And predict all the current things that we observe.
And then say, okay, what's next? What goes beyond that? So we're absolutely working on doing exactly that.
It's fascinating.
There's lots of directions to go here.
The direction I'm interested in is, think of hidden Markov chains as, you know, being developed at the
inception or origin or being, at least playing a big part in the birth of artificial intelligence.
And you were at MIT, like right when, you know, all of this stuff was starting, you were studying under
Marvin Minsky, which is amazing. And you were, you were, you know, having debates with him and Noam Chomsky
about this stuff. So there seems like, you know, my intuition would tell me that there's something
significant about the fact that your new theory dovetails with how AI started in some way. Like,
like if we're trying to birth a new kind of lower level simulacra reality with AI, and it started with,
you know, hidden Markov models, hidden Markov chains, and then you're trying to explain physics
through this, you know, that, that seems somehow important, especially as you talk about, uh,
context windows in your hidden Markov chains. Because like, you could theoretically create a
smaller hidden Markov chain for like, a lower level species, you know, you get back into the UFO
discussion, where it's like, are there beings like, higher on the consciousness food chain than us?
You're saying that that the Occam's razor explanation is there, but there's worse, you know,
teeming with life in the universe, you know, that are, you know, uh, way, way above, uh, uh, humanity
as far as their perceptive abilities. Could they then create context windows for humanity to operate
in? That's right. No, that with the trace logic, now you, you get this very interesting structure
on observations. If I've got this big matrix and take a trace on a small submatrix, say on the upper
left-hand corner of it, right? So that's my, my submatrix. The guy that can only see in the little
submatrix has a certain set of states that he can move around in, but the bigger matrix will notice
when he, when the state, there are exit states. So there, all this guy can see is his visible states,
but there are corridors out. There's a whole world outside of it. And then there are, there are
corridors back in. So there are exits, the world outside, and then there are re-entrances. So the
person who has the bigger matrix knows it and can play with you. They can, they have access to when
you, when the state leaves, what they're doing with it outside and what comes back in. And so you can
start, what, what, what comes out of this is all sorts of games that you can play. And also a notion of
multi-scale collective intelligence. Hmm. So I'm very interested in the work of Mike Levin.
Oh yeah, me too. Very, very. And, and, um, I'm a huge fan. Actually, we're just now starting up a
collaboration. We're going to get a postdoc together because of the trace logic, um, this recursive
trace logic, because it's a way of modeling the multi, um, scale collective intelligence. At least it's,
it's promising. The, the idea, you know, some Mike Levin has this wonderful set of work,
for example, with planaria, the planaria reproduce by cutting themselves in half, like grabs one end,
grab something and they tear themselves apart. And then they grow a new tail and new head. It's
bizarre, but they've been doing that for hundreds of millions of years. They don't die. There are cells
around that have been around for who knows how many millions of years. Anytime there's a mutation,
if it doesn't kill the cell, that mutation stays. So the genome is a mess. They have different numbers
of chromosomes in different cells. It's a, it's a complete mess genetically. And their reproduction,
their, their physiology is rock stable. They don't get cancer. Most of the, you know, they're almost
cancer-free. They reproduce. Their body morphology is, is great. And they, they live forever. And the
genes are, are just all over the place from cell to cell within a living organism.
How do you explain that?
I mean, you can see that. So it's a stunning, stunning observation.
Totally stunning, especially in a world where people think genes, you know, kind of predetermine
all physiological phenotypic outcomes.
Absolutely. I mean, I, I'll just mention briefly, I spent a lot of time with Francis Crick, the guy who
discovered the structure of DNA. He, he, he and a small group of us at UC Irvine called the Helmholtz
Club met for almost 20 years secretly studying consciousness. So we were, we were after, after
this, when Francis was trying to demystify consciousness, like he demystified life with,
with DNA. So, so this is a real blow to the DNA-centric point of view. It's not that DNA is irrelevant.
DNA is clearly an important part of the story, but when the DNA can be different from cell to
cell in a given organism, even the number of chromosomes, they're, they're, I forget what they
multiply, multi, some happen or not happen. There's some kind of name they give for these things where
you have different number of chromosomes in cell to cells. So the question is the one you raised,
which is, so what then is responsible for guiding this morphology? We thought it was the genes. The
genes are all over the place. And, and Mike is finding experimental evidence for some kind of,
you know, electric field, like kinds of manipulations. He can cut a planarian in half and
apply the right kind of potential to the halves and either grow another head. So he can have a two
headed planarian or two tails or something like that. So, so there are these, all of a sudden
there are these electric field connections, electrical connections between cells that seem
to be having some kind of intelligence that we don't, we don't understand at all. We're just
learning that, that they exist. So there's this level, but, but the way Mike talks about it is sort
of like, almost like a higher level programming language, right? So maybe the DNA is more like,
just like the simpler kind of code, but there's a higher level language that can manipulate that
code somehow or, or, or even just little, you know, raw statements in, in, in a language.
Yeah. And I think you can take Levin's work even farther because yeah, we know, we know that
voltage gated ion channels are responsible for, you know, cell communication. We know that
electromagnetic fields affect and dictate body morphology sometimes in an even more fundamental
way to DNA. And so I love the analogy of like hardware, software, the software are these like,
you know, electromagnetic fields, but then you get into really trippy territory because you can put,
uh, you know, frog embryo in a Faraday cage and it won't grow properly.
That's right.
And then you could put, you know, a plant or you just use the same example. So it's a perfect
experiment. You put a frog embryo next to a super powerful wifi router, or, you know, maybe a better
example, Chernobyl, where you have extremely, you know, excessive radiation and you end up with
too many mutations. So there's this efficient frontier of mutations. And then you get into,
again, anthropic principle stuff where you have the Schumann resonance and magnetosphere of the
earth, which clearly feels essential to dictating the right, you know, animal morphology. Because if
you put, you know, a thing in a Faraday cage or even put somebody out into space, they literally bring
often Schumann resonance machines up with them in space because it's familiar. And so the magnetosphere
of the earth perfectly shields us from enough cosmic radiation where we're not going to like
incinerate, but then lets in enough to allow, you know, just enough, uh, you know, UV radiation based
mutations in our genome to like evolve, you know, pretty perfectly. And it's, you get, it's very
strange. It's, it's, and then you get into the simulated reality stuff where is earth in a context
window itself. Right. That is, you know, more compressed than one of these larger context
windows. And, you know, are the UFOs that we're seeing, you mentioned they would monitor the exit
paths. That fascinates me because I think about when people have mystical experiences at the boundary,
you know, another thing you've brought up is the holographic principle, which Hawking talks about where,
you know, all 3d information can be encoded on, you know, it's 2d surface and that's really what
you're seeing. And so we, if we are in some sort of hologram and we're, we're, we're interacting with
these things that are higher, like the, the novel flatland, you know, the 19th century, you know,
we're, we're in 3d space and we're seeing something from higher dimensional space. They'd be looking at
where we're poking at the, the, the exits, you know, and then they'd, they'd be, they'd understand,
you know, BF Skinner style intermittent reinforcement and they'd understand cellular
automata style stuff as far as sort of managing the Petri dish. And then when, when would they
show up? They'd show up around nuclear because they don't want us to destroy ourselves or, or
maybe they're mining us for resources. I don't want to, you know, impugn any sort of, you know,
benevolence or intent, but they show up around UFOs show up around nuclear sites all over the world.
So that's fascinating. And they'd probably show up at the frontier of human ingenuity, because
if you talk about the Archimedes lever point of most leverage for like future timelines, you know,
the quantum stuff is like a third of our economy. Now it's like semiconductors, information technology.
And so you'd show up, you know, high voltage experimentation, particle accelerators. And they
seem to, again, anecdotally show up around some of these things as well. And then the final thing
they show up in is conscious, weird consciousness experiences. And if you look at all mystery
rituals across all these traditions, it's to liberate the soul from the body. And the soul is,
you know, it sounds like this inexplicable thing that we're kind of smuggling in. It's a placeholder
name, you know, but call it some tesseract, like, you know, higher dimensional thing. That's like
tethered to the body. Our body is a compressed sort of prism, you know, and then that would explain
near-death experiences where we're able to perceive more when you cut off that biological
sort of collapsing function. Then in these mystery rituals, if you, again, all these mystery rituals,
whether you're putting your hand in a glove of bullet ants, or you're taking some, you know,
crazy psychedelic kekion and the Greek Eleusinian mystery rituals back in the day,
it temporarily kills the physical body. And then you perceive much more. And then you see often these
beings, you know, and I know you're working with Andrew Gallimore who does, you know, these DMT
experiments, which again, you know, DMT comes often, you know, at the time of death or, you know,
at REM sleep. Um, so almost when you're most disembodied and then you see these entities that have
consistent taxonomies across the people that see them. So if we're in this sort of like lower,
like literal matrix, like actual matrix, you know, hidden Markov, you know, thing, um, then, uh, uh,
when you're poking at the boundaries with your consciousness or with high energy physics,
you see these entities and you see these UFOs. So I think the UFO thing is totally consistent with
your work. Right. Right. So the big picture that you're painting here is that there is some need to
understand this multi-scale collective intelligence, right? Because there seems to be all sorts of
pointers to things that cannot be explained within our current physicalist space-time framework.
And I completely agree. And here's the top level, how the Markov trace logic, the recursive trace
logic deals with this. It turns out if you have a Markov chain, you can have a bunch of states that
form what's called a community. So that once you are in these states, you tend to stay in those
states, your, your, your experiences tend to stay in that little group, but then there might be another
community over here and another community over there. And there are, there's a small chance that
you might move from this community to another community. Now within each community, there's
going to be a long-term behavior, you know, that you can write down a probability of being in each
state. Well, maybe I'll be in this state one, half the time and state two, a third of the time and so
forth. So these are sort of what are called the stationary measures. There'd be approximate
stationary measures, not, there's a stationary measure for the whole thing, but now, so this
community structure gives you different wells of intelligence. Here's one way of living, but if I
push you into the other community, this, then all of a sudden you, gravity pulls you, the Markov
matrix dynamics, think of it like gravity, pulls you into this other well. And now this is a different
solution space. Then it can have another solution space over there. So all you need are little
prods to go from one solution space to the other. And that could be the community structure. Now
with, if I look at one of these communities a little bit more closely, I might see, oh, well,
within it, there are some sub communities like this. There's this one community, but now there are like
five sub communities in it. So there are these five sub wells. And then with each one of those sub
wells, I can look at, oh, well, that's got another 10 sub wells within it. And you can begin to see that
a single matrix on trillions and trillions of states could have literally multi-scale
collective intelligence by all these little community structures built throughout of it.
So what we could be doing with our own headset is, so our space-time headset is really only
capturing a small bit of this huge multi-scale collective intelligence of the matrix that we
happen to be projected into. And so that's why, you know, we can only see certain aspects of it.
And all of a sudden they just, they transcend our space-time description, but, but they don't just,
they don't transcend science. We can build with the trace logic, the recursive trace logic,
we can actually build a model of these things and begin to understand things that perhaps we can't
see inside of space-time. Now, I should step back immediately and say, look, someone might say,
look, here's a cognitive scientist talking about doing science outside of space-time. He's way
outside of his pay grade, right? This is, that's the realm for real physicists, high energy theoretical
physicists and mathematicians to be doing that kind of stuff. So surely if it can be done,
someone else is doing it, you know, a cognitive scientist isn't going to be the first one to do
it. And I'm not. It turns out that there are many high energy theoretical physicists who have now
firmly stepped outside of space-time. They will say space-time is doomed. Now, Nima Arkani-Hamed,
David Gross, and others. Yeah. Nima Arkani-Hamed, Institute for Advanced Study.
Yeah, at Princeton, right.
As impressive as it gets when it comes to theoretical physicists.
David Gross, Nobel Prize winner.
There you go.
So, and what they've, what they're saying is that space-time is doomed. By that they mean it's
not fundamental. And they're saying we need to step outside of space-time to do physics at the
next level of physics. And they're finding structures. So, so it's, but it might sound
impossible. What in the world could you possibly mean to step outside of space-time, right? For most of us,
I talk about, to my colleagues about, we need to get outside of space-time. And they just look at me
like, what could you possibly be talking about? Where is outside of space-time? Because where is any,
where means inside space-time. Where is outside of space-time? And, but the where is entirely outside
the conceptual framework of space-time? And what they're finding, so Nima Arkani-Hamed is one of the
first pioneers in this era, is structures that they call positive geometries outside of space-time.
So, amplituhedron, sociohedron, cosmological polytopes, and, and, and other, other structures.
These are structures that are not inside space-time. They don't care about locality,
which is a key property of space-time. They couldn't care less about locality,
and they don't care about unitarity. So they, they couldn't care less about the fundamental property
of quantum mechanics, unitarity. They don't care about it. They're completely outside of space-time.
The, they, their geometry, their volumes and edges and vertices and so forth, as it turns out,
code beautifully and compactly for scattering probabilities, scattering amplitudes of particle
interactions inside space-time. That's the remarkable thing. So here's this object outside of space-time,
doesn't care about locality, doesn't care about unitarity at all, that is accurately describing
gluon interactions inside space-time. Interactions that, when you use Feynman diagrams inside space-time
to compute them, you, for a simple interaction with just a few particles, you could get millions of
terms, millions of terms. Outside of space-time, it boils down to a handful of terms. And you get the,
you get the right answer. Now, there's a lot of work to be done. I mean, they haven't got the whole
panoply of what you can do with Feynman diagrams, but they're working on it. It's quite, quite promising.
I mean, the fact- That's fascinating. It's quite- So you have theoretical physicists at the highest
level saying, you have to move outside of our conventional idiom of physics, of space-time,
in order to solve problems that are prosaic and conventional in space-time.
And they're also moving outside of quantum mechanics. So it's not just like, oh, we're going
to give a quantum foundation for space-time. No, they're saying we're going to go entirely outside
of space-time, entirely beyond quantum theory, and we will have space-time and quantum theory
joined at the hip, as Nemo likes to say, joined at the hip, coming out of something deeper. And this
is not just a one-off. It's so big now that the European Research Council has a 10 million euro
initiative. And there are many, many high-energy theoretical physicists and mathematicians
now on this 10 million euro initiative studying these positive geometries. So I'm by no means the
first, by any means, there's much more brilliant people out there already looking for stuff outside
of space-time and finding it. Well, this is an age-old debate, actually. I mean, the modern
instantiation of it goes back to the birth of quantum mechanics, where you had these debates between
Niels Bohr and Einstein. Einstein saying, you know, God doesn't play dice. This can't just be
probabilities. You know, we need to understand some sort of ontological truth that, you know,
the quantum mechanics stuff is pointing to. Einstein himself is obviously a big contributor
to quantum mechanics. And Bohr was saying, you know, no, you know, if you think you understand this
stuff, you don't. That sort of turned into this Copenhagen interpretation, which mutated then into
this sort of shut up and calculate. It's just, you know, this mathematical formalism, you know,
don't think about it as some ontological descriptor. And I sort of agree with you. I don't think that,
I think science is a map. It's not the territory. So I think it would take a lot of hubris to say that,
you know, quantum mechanics or general relativity reflects true, you know, reality itself.
But I do think it's a really interesting exercise to look at the spookiness in quantum mechanics
as a pointer to a deeper truth and to a deeper ontological reality. And so when you tell me
things like, oh, you can run a double slit experiment, you know, today, not observe it.
And then, you know, you run it in three days with a, you know, a paired electron,
electron, and then they have inverse behaviors. If you measure it, you know, in three days,
and then, you know, you go, it's like, there's a, there's temporal non-locality in, in quantum
mechanics. And when you, when you, when you go into those sorts of, you know, things that,
that seems to point to like a, almost like a time agnostic reality or something. I mean,
you even mentioned Schrodinger's equation going the same way forwards as it does backwards.
That's same with electromagnetism and general relativity, you know, the unitarity thing.
So yeah, is there something weird about like time seems like this very weird thing that we just
don't understand? Like time could, I mean, in, in maybe in your model, you know, which might be
more kind of computational or something, it's like a saved game states instead of time, or I don't
know. What do you think? So, so a lot of interesting points. So I would say what quantum theory does do
is put front and center the observer. It says, we can't ignore the observer. In Einstein, in Newton,
the observer could be ignored. The observer didn't interfere, so you could just ignore the observer.
In Einstein's gravity and its special relativity, you, you have an observer, but it's just clocks and,
and pointers. But in quantum mechanics, all of a sudden, the observer is right there in your face.
When you do an observation, the wave function is no longer the thing. You have a collapse of the
wave function. There in your face is the observer is doing something. We have to understand this is
no longer, you know, something that we can dismiss. The very coherence of science is at stake.
That's the key point. The coherence of science is at stake. If we cannot give an account of
observation that makes it possible for us to have true theories that accommodate an observer,
if we cannot get that whole story to work, then what are we doing? We are way off in fairy tale land
until we can ground this whole thing. We have a theory of the observer that's coherent,
that leads to, that explains why our scientific theories have data that's believable, right? Our
observations are giving us the data. Our observations need to be related to the external world in some
rational way so that we can actually get theories of the structure. And that structure better come
back and say that our theories, that our observations are good data. And that we don't have in quantum
theory. And the attempts to solve the measurement problem don't work. So the collapse of, so for
example, the Everett interpretation, the many worlds. What Everett says is every time there's an
observation, there is no collapse. There's, I mean, there are, if there are trillion branches to the wave
function, all trillion take off. So Hoffman is making this measurement and there are now a million
Hoffmans in a million branches or a trillion or whatever it might be. Problem solved, right? There
is no collapse, so we don't have to worry about the role of the observer and not quite, doesn't quite
work. So the problem is, why do I believe in the Schrodinger equation and quantum theory? Well, it's
because the statistics in my experiments that I do in my lab agree with the statistics I get when I
look at the Schrodinger equation and take its amplitude squared. So it's the frequencies that
I've observed in my lab matching the frequencies predicted by the amplitude squared of the Schrodinger
equation, Schrodinger wave function, that convinced me of its, now in the Everett interpretation,
I am in every branch. That means every possible sequence of outcomes that could have happened,
if I'm doing, you know, I'm doing like a million measurements, then there is a Hoffman that saw
one sequence of a million. There's Hoffman that saw a different sequence. Every possible sequence is
out there. So where is the connection between my Hoffman observing my sequences and saying,
aha, this sequence confirms because it's the amplitude squared. No, there's going to be a
sequence when I get the exact same output every time. There is no variation. That's one possibility,
right? And so it raises the question, if the Everett interpretation, the many,
many worlds interpretation is what we take, then I have no reason to believe that the frequencies that I
observe in my experiments are related to reality. Because I could be in a branch where I get this really
anomalous set of frequencies because that happens. I mean, Everett says anything that can possibly happen
will happen. So every crazy outcome, not just the, and if you then say, oh, well, but we can fix that
because I, you know, you're more likely, Don, you're more likely to be in the high probability,
high amplitude, you know, things. And that's no longer than just quantum mechanics, because
in the Everett interpretation, Don, there is a Don already in all the trillions of,
so who is this new Don that you're saying is going to be dropped into one of the more high
probability, quote unquote, buckets? And what is that mechanism of dropping in? Why should I believe
that? This is no longer quantum mechanics. This is a huge addition to quantum mechanics. Never been
worked out. So under the, so I don't believe the multiverse right now because it, it leads to
the claim, the, the conclusion that our science is incoherent. It's incoherent because our, our
observations do not support the theory. Isn't there some, cause I agree, I'm not a big multiverse fan
and you can't infinitely split, you know, Don's into, you know, different, you know, and it's also,
it's unfalsifiable, right? You end up in these sort of never ending conversations where it's like,
well, that happened even though it was low probability and it's, you know, it's somewhere
else and it's continuously forking. And it's like, I don't, I don't really know what you do with that.
Having said that, if you take things like the delayed choice experiment, double slit experiment,
some of these things at face value, even Don's decision to measure, you know, the collapse of
the wave function, you know, and, and, and look and see, and then you see this eigenstate, you see
a state with where the, you know, photon hit the cardboard backing. You don't see this interference
pattern that took place, you know, out of your, your free will. And so you are affecting physics on the
most fundamental level. Like what we take as fundamental physics, you are affecting by even choosing to make
that measurement. And, and I think that's kind of undeniable. And so at that point, you don't have
to get into parapsychology and say that we are affecting random quantum mechanical processes.
If you just take that at face value, then your physics is already different than my physics.
And then don't you get into territory where, yeah, maybe space time is this kind of consensus
collapsing function construct, but you have different local collapsing functions. You have
different local air pockets of consensus reality and consensus physics.
A clean notion of the observer and its relationship to our, our physical theories is not optional. We
have to have a clean notion of the observer. And in quantum theory, there is none. Quantum theory says
we have absolutely have to have one. But if you look at the different kinds of theories that are out
there, so for example, the multiverse one, but then there are the ones like the Bohmian thing where you
stick a particle in on the wave function. It turns out when you look at those, they, they don't work
when you go to, to, to relativity theory. So quantum field theory, they just don't, they don't work
there. There's a problem of, of, you know, scaling as you, you know, renormalization problems and so
for the, that they don't work. And when you go to things like, um, uh, Chris Fuchs, a really wonderful
man. We're friends and brilliant, brilliant guy. He's, he's got his cubist theory, which, which
basically is a subjective Bayesian. It says the, the wave function, um, and the amplitude squared is just
the subjective degrees of belief. And if you, if you keep it purely subjective, um, then you can
solve the so-called Wigner's friend problem, right? So, you know, there's the standard problem in
quantum mechanics where there's someone, you know, watching, let's say a Schrodinger cat
inside a room, a friend of yours, and, and they're waiting to see if the cat's going to be alive or
dead, but you're outside and you're in a separate room. And so you're, you're waiting and you,
you have a wave function yourself for your friend and the, and the cat, whether they're,
the cat is alive and the friend says they're alive and the cat is dead and the friend says,
so you have your own wave function. And, and it turns out that, um, under some interpretations,
um, the person inside could see the cat's dead and you don't know, you're still in a superposition,
you don't know. So you have different statements about reality. So the, the, um, someone like,
you know, Chris Fuchs and, and the quantum Bayesian with a subjective Bayesian approach would,
would say no problem because, um, these are just degrees of belief. So the experimenter outside
the lab room and the experimenter inside the lab room are each interpret, you know, are allowed
their own, uh, their own interpretation, right? Their, their own, their own, um, probabilities.
Yeah. But, but then if you do that, there's a problem because then how do you get the connection
between the wave function and the objective world? What is the data that makes you want
to say that this is the right wave function to have? Are, if, if your ideas are just purely
subjective, then it's not tethered to the objective data that needs to tether it. This is just your,
and if you try to tether it, then all of a sudden you're going to get back to the Wigner's
Fenn problem. So, so the bottom line is I see right now that what quantum mechanics has done is
said what you were just talking about. We have to understand how the observer gives us the data
in our scientific theories or we're incoherent. And there is no theory in quantum mechanics that
does that right now. So science is at this unbelievable place. It's unbelievable. We're
this far advanced. We do not have a theory of the observer that will be, that will make
science itself coherent. And so what I'm proposing with this recursive trace logic is
what Leibniz proposed 300 years ago. We have to start, and what Wheeler proposed
in 1989, ip from bit, we have to go back and start where we, the thing we ignored, we, in Newton,
we ignored the observer. In Einstein, we talked about it, but we ignored it. In quantum mechanics,
we can't ignore it and we don't know what to do with it. So, so I'm saying that's where
science has to go next. Science now we have to start over, nail down exactly what we mean
by an observer, get it mathematically precise, and then go back, show that once we have this,
like if the recursive trace logic works, we'll see. I mean, hopefully I'll know within two or
three years. If it works, the idea would be, we will then show how space-time, curved space-time
and quantum field theory, arise as one of the more trivial headsets that comes out of a general
theory of observation. So the idea is we have this recursive trace logic, it's completely general
notion of observation, and then policies and meta-policies and so forth, completely general
notion of agency. So the agents now can choose different experiments that they want to do.
Can, does that give us the framework to give us all of our current scientific theories? Quantum
field theory, general relativity, black holes, the whole bit, big bang, the whole bit, nothing left
out. And then, then show, but this is just a trivial example of what we can do. That's, that's your
four-dimensional headset, one of time, three of space, but why not? So, so for example, in the
Amplituhedron, with, with, with, with Neymar, Connie, Hamed, there is a parameter in the Amplituhedron,
which is the, the, the, the dimension of the space-time in which you're going to, you know,
project this positive geometry into that. And in our case, it's four, but his mathematics allows
bigger numbers. Four is, is one of the smaller and less interesting numbers. It's what the, perhaps,
the smallest non-trivial number, but as you go up that you can, so already the, the, the serious
physicists working outside of space-time, why I should say high-energy theoretical physicist,
it's not all physics, high-energy theoretical physicists who, this is their bailiwick.
They're already saying we're finding these geometries that characterize scattering amplitudes
in a way that the space-time that we perceive is just one of many, many possible space-times in
which we could talk about this stuff. And I'm saying, that's right. We're going to now have
to just go and look at the set of all possible headsets of all kinds that observers could come
up with. And the, and it's going to be infinite numbers. So ours is one of the more trivial ones.
And now with the policies, so remember a policy was a way of crawling around on the observer windows.
And what would it mean to be embodied? Because we talked about embodiment and I said it was one of
the smaller, you know, what does it mean to be embodied? Well, what does it mean for me to move
my hand from here to grab that cup? It's going to be a policy in which I have a bunch of observer
windows. The observer window in which there's another observer, that there's, that's another frame,
another frame, another frame, another frame, right? Notice that that's a particular subset of windows
in this huge trace logic. There's lots of, but that, that is one frame in it. And I'm being forced
to use frames of this type to make the cup move from there to there. But if I think about it,
there are lots of other policies in which my hand stays here and the cup just moves.
There are all sorts of policies and there are a lot more of those than there are in which my hand has
moved in this particular way to do it. So that's where you see immediately that the embodiment is
a measure zero set of the whole thing. But, but we're forced to right now to have these policies
in which only, we can only directly, so to speak, change certain things, my fingers, my toes, my,
those are the, we were stuck to those observer window that have that kind of thing in them.
And we can only move them in certain sequences. So we have to be really, really clever. I want
this cup to go from here to there. There's a million ways to do it, but not if I'm forced to
use my hand. Now there's like one, just a smaller set of ways that I can do it to get it to, to move
over there. So, so that's why I said earlier on that once you get to this recursive trace logic
and have the notion of policies, that then you see embodiment is not necessary. And in fact,
it's probability zero. It's just stunning. So if embodiment is actually maladaptive
for life, are there any observable things in our current space time that you think might actually
be alive? Well, it's an interesting question you raised there. Is it maladaptive for our current,
so embodiment, is it maladaptive? And- Well, clearly not for us in some way,
shape or form, like it's the best form for us, but- Well, it's, it's, it raises a big question.
And that is, what is this whole game about? Right? Well, you know, there are all these windows
and all these infinite number of policies. And so I, now I'm thinking about consciousness itself
and, and what is consciousness up to? And all I can think of is that consciousness must be
in knowing itself by exploring itself from an infinite number of perspectives and from an
infinite number of policies, an infinite number of meta-policies. And that's in some sense what
an infinite unbounded consciousness does to explore and know itself. You take, you take a perspective
and maybe you lose yourself in the perspective so completely that you don't even know that you're
the infinite consciousness, right? Oh, that's beautiful. Well, that comports with a bunch of
religious stuff. It really does. And it really does, but now there's math behind it. Yeah. And
John Wheeler, you know, wrote his you on that piece of paper of the universe observing itself.
You have Alan Watts and other mystics talking about, you know, we're the universe trying to observe
itself or, or piece itself path back together. I think that's sort of a common thread, but I was
sort of going like, you know, in a slightly different direction, which is, you know, obviously you have
these sort of context windows, you have these different matrices, you know, we see a specific
matrix, maybe we're teaming with alien life and they see larger matrices and they can kind of pop
into ours and mess with us. But are there things in our space time, things like, I don't know,
plasma might be an example. There's a great book called, uh, the new science of heaven by a guy named
Robert temple. And he talks about plasma being the substrate of the universe and alive and atomic
matter actually being the exception to the rule and charged ions, you know, uh, stripped of most of
what we, what we think of as atoms actually just permeating the entire universe. And there are all
these strange experiments of like humans walking up to plasma and it cohering to the human's heartbeat.
Um, a lot of the UFO stuff looks like kind of plasma balls that seem to be sort of synchronized with
our own intent or something. So in this model, are there things that we see that we, we attribute to
kind of, you know, just like the ant would see us and they'd be like, well, I don't know if that
might be like natural phenomena or like they have no idea what we, what we are. We see these things
and we put these natural placeholders on them, but now assuming that the likelihood is life is
disembodied. It's not the opposite. We're the exception to the rule. Right. Right. Then some of
these natural phenomena, things like plasma might be alive.
Right. Now the, the, the one proviso is that plasma is whatever this thing is seen through our
headset. So already whatever we see and call plasma is already been dumbed down to fit into our little
headset. So the trace logic would force us to say whatever plasma, whatever is really causing me to
see plasma could be infinitely more interesting than what, what I call plasma. But it still gets to,
I think to the point that you want to make, which is once we have this ability to see others as
sub traces of us, can we start to play games? Can we start to do stuff? And absolutely. And so that's
where, for example, I think I'm no expert in the UAP kind of stuff or the DMT stuff. I'm collaborating
with Gallimore on, on DMT, but it seems to me that there are tools here to, to allow you to do
whatever you want. Um, basically because you have a different time counter than the sub trace. So
you have all the time in the world to do whatever you want to compared to, to, to them. They, they may
see as instantaneous, um, what's happening, like moving from stationary to Mach 40, you know, some,
some craft immediately. But from the UAP point of view, it's not, it could be very, very leisurely in
their headset because their clock is going at a different pace than our clock and their, their
space could be very, very different than our space. You, you, you would also end up with your
model. If you have these different perceptive windows and you have a higher perceptive window,
if you wanted to keep, uh, a lower, you know, system organism with it, with a smaller perceptive
window out, but you also want to do initiate the right people. Like you get back to stories of
Plato where you have a cave, you have people kept in the cave by the sort of guardian class.
And yeah, the weird thing about the UFO thing is like very few people can say anything sort of
coherent about it, but there's an overwhelming amount of circumstantial evidence around it.
So it's like those two things simultaneously is the weirdest thing about it. And it almost implies
that there's like an intent on the other end that are like dangling bizarre anomalies that like are,
are meant to not be collapsed into any coherent theory. And it's almost like you're, and this
is, if you get into like the deeper kind of, you know, substrates of Jacques Vallée and some of the
hardcore UFO researchers, this is what they're getting at. You almost end up with this model that is
similar to Plato where like this, these guardians, which literally I'm not even talking about like
elites in society, socioeconomically, I'm talking about like guardians of reality itself are
dangling things in front of us and getting us to, you know, showing us the light. We're glimpsing the
light and then we're, we're moving outwards and ascending through the cave. Uh, but it's also
adaptive to kind of keep most of us in a cave or something. And, and, and if you think about
technology, it is this forcing function, whether it's AI or nuclear or, you know, the ability for the
human genome to be sort of messed with, it's this forcing function of like, like, if you had this
technology, the, the, the, the latency and the bandwidth limitations of humans to like do really
amazing things and do really destructive things all goes out the window. And so completely, so it's
almost like your stuff plus the Nick Bostrom simulation stuff, you end up with this theory of
reality where like some higher, uh, living organisms that are disembodied are probably managing us.
Well, yeah, there's a couple, another way to think about it that makes your point, I think. And that
is one way that we could think about what's, what's going on with like the recursive trace logic is
it's giving us a layer of software outside of our headset. So this is just a VR game.
And by stepping out of space time headset and getting a first layer of software description
of how the headset is built, um, we get some interesting new power. If, if, if you're not
the Grand Theft Auto example, right? If, if you're a wizard at Grand Theft Auto, you can race your car
faster than anybody, get from here to there, steal stuff, whatever. But if I'm the geek that can't
drive a car, but I wrote the software, then I can do magic. I mean, I can literally take
the air out of the tires of the, of the, of the, of the wizard. I can make his car disappear. I can
make it turn into a turtle. I can do anything I want to because I know the software. So we have,
when you, when you look at the recursive trace logic, you realize that those with the bigger trace,
the bigger matrices have the ability, they have the, they have software. They, they have the software.
If they have enough, if they're enough bigger than you, they have the software to know how your
headset is working and they can just play with you. Like, uh, like someone who knows the software
brand, they can just play and do, and do complete math. So you can't think big enough. You absolutely,
you can't think big enough when you, when you realize the possibilities that the recursive trace
logic brings up. But I would point out in spirit, it's very similar to Nick Bostrom, but there is a key
difference between what I'm saying and what Bostrom is saying. And it's an, it's an important
difference. Um, Bostrom is saying that, yes, what we're, we're doing here is just a simulation.
And there's some geek with, uh, they're a little computer and writing software. And, and we're just,
you know, characters in their, in their software. And then this world is just, and that person,
by the way, is also just a character in some deeper level of software and, and there goes
all the way down, but at the bottom, he puts a physical world. There's some physical place
and there's some, and I'm saying there is no physical bottom to this whole thing. So
that's one difference. There is no physical bottom. So that's one difference between what
I'm saying and what Bostrom says. And there's another thing I'm saying that's different. Bostrom
is saying that somehow you could program a computer to create the conscious experience.
If you, if you, if you believe that there's conscious experience, then it has to be. So
I won't say what Nostrom Bostrom believes. I will say this. If you are doing this computer
simulation thing and you believe that there's consciousness, then you're going to be forced
to say that somehow a computer program done right will give you consciousness. And I deny
that. I think that that's in principle, not possible. There is no way to start with algorithms
and get consciousness. Integrated information theory, all these other approaches have not
been able to give us a single concrete example of a specific conscious experience. And I predict
they never will. They'll never get close.
I would predict that too, because we're not working with the tools of whatever, you know,
elements created us. And so it's, it's, it's interesting, you know, when, when simulation
theory gets talked about, I feel like there are two connotations. There's the grand theft
auto nihilistic connotation of like, you know, or conclusion rather where it's like, uh, anything
goes, we're in a simulator, we're in a video game. Uh, and then the second thing is more aspirational,
which is like, there are realities and windows above us. And so another question I would ask
is, uh, you're talking about between species, you know, some theoretical alien species and
us, and then down the food chain to, to lower level animals, as far as our perceptive apparatuses,
you know, being going from, you know, somewhat limited to very unlimited, um, within a single
lifetime, do you think a human can widen their perceptive apparatus in a way where they see
more? I, I do. And, and this is sort of gets spiritual now. I think that that's party,
partly what's going on here and what it's about. So I think, I mean, I don't know what consciousness
is up to, but I can guess. I mean, I'm a scientist, but I can throw out hypotheses. One thing I think is
consciousness trying to understand itself by taking an infinite number of perspectives and getting lost
in the perspective. So in some sense to really take a perspective means to lose yourself in it. So
to really believe that I am this body and to really be tied to it and be afraid of its death
and, and, and, and so forth. So, so I'm really, and then to slowly wake up and now to the aspirational
part, as, as I wake up and, and as I get to the point where I get better and better technologies
and I realize that I can use this power, but I'm also waking up to who I am. So I'm, so this is the
aspirational part where consciousness lost itself in the game, identified with an avatar.
It's getting a better, better understanding of that part of the matrix. It's getting more power.
And now it comes to the point where it's going to choose how it's going to use that power.
Do I want to use it to hurt people, to dominate them, or, or am I going to use it in some other
way to the extent that consciousness wakes up to, oh, wait a minute, that's just me. That person there
is me in a different avatar. See, it's all one, one consciousness through an infinite number of
windows and an infinite number of policies and an infinite number of meta policies.
It gets lost, thinks it's just the avatar, but as it, as it gets more power and it wakes up
to its identity as the one consciousness that transcends this whole set of games, then
you realize that now that I've, I've got this new weapon or I've got this, this gun, I would be a fool
to shoot that person because it's like shooting myself in the foot. Why would I take a weapon and shoot
myself in the foot? Because that person is not my enemy. That person is me. And so that's the
aspirational part of this that, and it leads to a whole interesting, you know, religious kind of
thing, moral kind of thing. What are we here for? And, and what, what do we learn in the process?
How do you logically conclude that other people around you are also yourself?
Well, so, so there is a leap there. So the leap is to say that, um, I do think that
if you look at the trace logic, it's saying that as you go up and up, all these windows are
connected, right? There is a pre, as Leibniz says, there's a pre-established harmony. And there is a,
there's a unifying structure that ties the whole thing into one. And so, but as I said earlier,
this is just a mathematical theory, it's a scientific theory, and no theory is ever the
final theory. What it points to though, what this theory points to is a fundamental unity of
consciousness. Despite all this beautiful structure, it's, there's a fundamental unity. So I have the,
the feeling that there is this one deep consciousness that we all are, each of us is, but just seeing
through a particular avatar, through a particular window, policy, meta-policy, and so
forth. And waking up to the fact that, oh, that's, Jesse is just done. And we're having this
conversation, but the way I treat Jesse is exactly the way I'm treating myself. And if I, I don't want
to shoot myself in the foot, I wouldn't want to shoot Jesse in the foot either, because that's,
that's, that's me. And so that's the aspirational part. The, when it's interesting because evolution
in, in physicalist framework doesn't tell me that you and I are one, it tells me that we're
competitors and I need to beat you to get whatever resources I need. But this theory of the observers
says a very, very different story. It says, no, that, that evolutionary story is, um, works inside
the headset. It's, it's, if you, if you stick inside the headset, it's a good theory. It works.
That's, that's fascinating. And your father was a priest. Is that right?
No, he was a, um, uh, fundamentalist Christian, um, Protestant minister. Right.
So this has to dawn on you. You've gone through your own arc like this, where you started religious,
then you got into this sort of dog eat dog Darwinian model, which, you know, it's actually
adaptive for us not to see reality because of evolutionary game theory. And then you figured
out this sort of matrix model, which if you go all the way up the chain of consciousness,
you end up with this unified field of consciousness. So you moved from God and then he moved away
from God and then he moved back to God. Right. And part of the journey for me was
what I loved about science was the mathematical rigor, precise theories with precise assumptions
and mathematical precision and testing. You knew the theories were consistent. They may not be true,
but they're consistent, but it was physicalist. And that didn't, I mean, ultimately it felt like
there was something missing in the physical. And it turns out there is, we, we can't get a theory of
the observer yet in a, in a physicalist framework. We just can't. And we can't get a theory of conscious
experience and we can't get a theory of the illusion of conscious experience. There's nothing that
gives us any specific illusion of a conscious experience. So that, that was, the plus of science
was rigor, no nonsense, consistency. The, the downside was the physicalism assumption. It seemed to be
too restrictive. On the religious side, the downside was complete lack of rigor and no consistency
and no tests, no empirical tests. It was, and, and as a result, a lot of the stuff you hear,
a lot of stuff I heard, is just utter nonsense. That, that was the downside. The, the upside was
the idea that consciousness is fundamental and somehow love and unity is, is, I mean, like with,
with a lot of the religions, the fundamental thing is love your neighbor as yourself because your
neighbor is yourself. If you stick to that fundamental idea in the, in the religions and
cut away everything else, I'm on board. That seems really right. Most of the other stuff is all this
inconsistent nonsense and, you know, all the snake oil and so forth. So you can see the, the problem
that you've got as a, as a human being in, in this kind of situation, there's snake oil and so forth.
And yet the fundamental thing is love your neighbor as yourself. Science has got the rigor.
They got the mathematics. That, that seems really good, but, but there's no reason to love your
neighbor as yourself. I mean, in the sense that, I mean, that's dog eat dog, Darwinian kind of
thing. I love my neighbor as myself as long as convenient for me and, you know, and so forth,
but there's no deep sense in, in which I'm one with my neighbor. And so for me, the synthesis
is to pull the, to take the rigor of science, the mathematical precision and the, the absolute
insistence on data, careful observations, and to take from the, the spiritual traditions, get rid of
all the nonsense, get rid of all the hand wave and dogma, and keep the essence, which is there is a
fundamental unity. Love your neighbor as yourself because your neighbor is, take that from the
spiritual tradition, bring those two things together. And then I think we have a new thing
going forward that could really be the aspirational science meets spirituality that you were talking
about. Do you believe in God?
I believe that there, that, I would say this, as best as words can do it, right? So I, so I'll say
this. I think to answer the question, I have to be very, very careful. Words are just words.
But I said, then, you know, science starts with assumptions. There is no scientific theory of
everything. And so, so we, whatever reality is, infinitely transcends what science could do,
right? And yet I'm a scientist. I think science is a fantastic tool. I want to use it. But reality,
whatever it is, infinitely, not just a little bit, infinitely transcends anything that we could come
up with in science. But to answer your question, so I'm not dodging your question. I'm going to get to
your question. But it's, it's so deep that I'll have to say a couple of things. There are most of
the stuff that we know, we don't know through science or through study. The color green. At some
point in your life, when you were two, someone said, Jesse, that's green. And you looked and you go,
oh, okay, that's green. Someone pointed to a rabbit and said, that's a rabbit. And you got it. And if
you think about what went on there, it's a miracle, right? Your mom sitting with you and points and says,
rabbit, and you look once or twice and you get it. There were a thousand, a million hypotheses that you
could have, maybe it was the ear and the rug. Maybe it was the color of the fur. Maybe it was the left eye.
Maybe it was the, you know, the left paw and the cup over there. What could you possibly mean by
rabbit? And yet at the right age, someone points, says rabbit, just once or twice is all you need
typically. And you get it. This is called learning by ostensive definition. And almost everything you
know is not because of a scientific theory. It's because of ostensive definition. Everything of
everyday life that you know, colors, shapes, someone pointed and said, and you got it.
That's ostensive definition. So now, what do I mean by God? Because God is just a word, right? So I'm
getting, so I want to get, escape from the trap of using words and getting trapped and just,
so I'm going to use ostensive definition. Here's what I think God is. I'm going to say,
what I'd like you to do is ask yourself the question, I wonder what my next thought will be,
and then just wait.
What happened?
I thought about God, but it was, it was sort of silent for a little bit.
Did you have a point there when, when I said, um, I wonder what my next thought will be. And then
you just were waiting for a minute to see what your first thought will be. Was there a little
gap there?
There was a gap there. And I was waiting for what my next thought would be, which is,
I'm assuming what you generally are pointing to, but my thinking is also very weird and I don't think
in words. So it wasn't like, I wasn't saying that in my head. I was just sort of waiting.
You were waiting out about God. So that, that, that's the best pointer I can give
for what I mean by God is that awareness that you can have. And you can do this anytime you want
to actually, is to just say, I'll just not think for a while and just be aware without thought
that, that awareness is what I think is God. And I believe in that and it, it, um, cannot be described.
Yeah. And you almost, you got me thinking about this when you said, you know, what, how did I learn
about the color green and probably all sorts of concepts that I take for granted in everyday life.
And it's almost like we have meme libraries in our head and we attribute, like what we see is an
interplay between what's adaptive for us to see as you described so well in your book.
Like, but there's also some super imposition of what we have in our head, some like Bayesian
priors of like what we think the concept is that we're like imposing on reality at all
times.
Yes.
And so when you say God is the suspension of thought, I think it's almost impossible. Like
in waking life, everything has that, all these connotations that I've placed on all these
things. There's nothing like going to like an entirely new context, like going on a trip
and like you're in some vast new landscape and you can't attach any of that sort of baggage
to like all the concepts that you're like taking in.
Right. So that's a very good point. And I would just say that, but I'm trying to point
to them with that little thing I did, you know, I wonder what my next thought will be. What
I'm pointing to is just the raw awareness in which all these things arise, the colors, the
sounds, the emotions, the thoughts, that raw, that raw awareness that doesn't require any
of these things. That is what I'm trying to point to.
But I'm still, I'm looking at your shirt and I'm looking at the chair and there are all these
things that I have superimposed ideas about that might not, you know, be at the forefront of my
mind in my sort of waking consciousness reality, but it's impossible for me to like strip my
preconceptions about those things while I'm processing them.
Whereas someone like the Dalai Lama might be able to, right? Someone who has been spending
years in meditation would be able to say, yes, I can just be the presence, the awareness
and no content. And that's what I mean by God is that awareness without any content. I think
it's accessible to all of us, but it's something that requires practice to let go.
So, why do you think there's a bliss in that? Does that speak to this sort of, again, meta
level, like not the Darwinian, but the meta level, if you have all these matrices, the
adaptiveness of seeing more? Does the fact that meditation, you end up in these sort of city
states or whatever, you know, different traditions call it different things, but you end up in
these states of joy just about reality itself. Is there something adaptive about that?
I don't know if I would put it in like the evolutionary adaptive kind of context, because
I think it transcends that. In some sense, evolutionarily, it's not adaptive to not be
thinking about stuff and planning and washing out for things that could kill you.
But it is if consciousness is best not embodied, and then if your consciousness persists past
life, and if you're going to dissolve or self-nullify into, you know, sort of this greater harmonic
consciousness, which is not at all a prescription or something I would propose, but on some theoretical
level.
Yes, I think, and by the way, now I'm speaking beyond my spiritual attainment, but I'll...
Me too.
So just with that proviso, I'm no saint, but I would say that the point of going into silence
and letting go of all thoughts, and the reason it leads to bliss, is that is the fundamental
nature of reality. None of this really does matter, in a sense. This is just a headset.
And you put it on, you let yourself get lost in the game for a while. You let yourself get
upset for a while. And then you woke up and go, oh, you take the headset off. Okay, so
I learned something about myself from that perspective. Now let me try on this other headset.
And, but you were never in any danger. You'd let yourself feel like you were in danger. But the
bliss is, there is in some sense only you, the one, and there is no danger. There's only the love,
the unity. But the, it's in the headset that you get all these emotions, but you're, and you let
yourself have them. You, you, that's part of experiencing all the possibilities. You let
yourself experience that, and then you transcend it. That's the, and again, I'm speaking way over
my pay grade, but, but yeah. How do we triangulate or figure out what true reality actually is? So
I'll take at face value, your theory that, you know, the reason I see your face, I see your shirt,
and it looks a certain way to me is because of that's somehow adaptive from some evolutionary game
theory perspective. But what about like, yeah, what do you, what do you actually look like? What is,
what is the chair you're sitting on actually look like? What is this table actually in some like
platonic higher sense, or in your case, this higher context window matrix? Is there some way to get at
that with your theory? Oh, I think that all that, all these things that you're talking about only exist
as icons in the headset. They're, they have no deeper reality than that. So these, these, so I'll,
but it is still some unique binary code sequence ultimately. Um, or maybe not a completely unique.
Well, yeah, go for it. So, yeah. So I, I would, so I'll, I'll put it this way because it's very stark
right now. I have no neurons. I have no brain. If you looked, you would see a brain. If you,
and I'm a cognitive neuroscientist, I like neuroscience, but I think that neurons do
not exist when they're not perceived. And this table does not exist when it's not perceived. There
is, there is nothing more to the table than the raw perceptions I'm having right now. There is
literally nothing more to it than that. Really? Because there are, you know, people who are
sort of solipsistic holographic universe types. And then there's like the neutral monists where,
you know, there's some interplay between conscious and then consciousness. And there
is, but there is something objective. And then there's like the materialist reductionist,
you know, this is all very separate mind matter are very separate. And so what you're saying,
it sounds like you're more in the, like, it's all, it's all like a product of your perception.
And that's like, this isn't real. Well, it's, it's a real experience and, and it's,
the experience is there only for, for so long as I choose to look and make that experience. And as
soon as I go away, my table is gone. Jesse may still see this table, but, but it's your table.
It's not mine because that, that's your experience. There's no such thing as the table. There's only
your experience and my experience. We coordinate such that we think that there is the table.
But what if the monad were perceiving the table? Wouldn't it see something discreet? It might be
more complex than what we see because it's like way more evolved than us, but.
Well, but I would say you are the ultimate consciousness through a Jesse avatar talking
with the Hoffman avatar and through the Jesse avatar, you're creating a table through the Hoffman
avatar. The same you is creating a table. My, my table is now gone. Whereas your avatar's
table is still there. Where do you get that? The idea that we are sort of fractal,
almost pinched nodes of a larger. The, the recursive trace logic itself.
That is the mathematical. So when Leibniz was saying that he wanted a theory of observers being
fundamental with a, with a pre-established harmony, what I'm proposing is that this recursive trace
logic is that pre-established harmony. And it shows how you can talk about separate monads,
separate observers. And yet the pre-established harmony shows that they're all one.
So there is, it's like, um, almost like a stylus on an LP player or something like we're, uh, the
measurement instrument of something that is, uh, fundamentally there, but there's, uh, it's,
I'm seeing this unique perception based on my own measurement instruments of my body and,
and what's adaptive for me. So we're seeing that as well. That's right.
The monad would see something different, but there's no objective. It's, it's always going to
be unique.
The only objective thing is you, you, the awareness staring through a Jesse avatar and staring through,
that's the only thing that, that, that is the objective reality. All this other stuff literally
comes and goes. This is very much like, uh, again, a VR headset. When I'm playing Grand Theft Auto,
I look over there and I see a red Ferrari and you all, you're, you're, you also are playing with
Grand Theft Auto. And I say, Jesse, look at that red Ferrari. You say, oh yeah, I see it. And then I
look away. My red Ferrari is literally gone. There's no red Ferrari anywhere for me. And you might
still see it. So Jesse has his own red Ferrari and there's no red Ferrari in the supercomputer that's
running this thing. There's just bits running on the computer in this example. So my red Ferrari is
gone completely. And if I go back, I'll render a red Ferrari and then I've got one. So I'm really
saying I render a table when I look and it's no, it doesn't exist because I'm not rendering it. So
I'm rendering. And that is actually impressive. If you think about this is a really complicated world
and I render it effortlessly. I just look and it happens. That's how good you are.
That's fascinating. So it's almost like conscious agents or perceivers are the fundamental
units of the real ultimate reality. It's kind of empowering in some sense.
It is. I would just make one provisional and that is, I think there is only the one awareness.
Sure.
But all these conscious agents that I talk about are a scientific tool to talk about it. But I would
want to say the awareness transcends my theory. It transcends any theory. But given that, then I agree
with you. I just want to always make sure that we're humble about our scientific theories.
Well, you could say we're windows and the sunlight peering through the windows is what's ultimately,
you know, binding all of us or something. And so we're like pinched nodes on a circuit or something,
and we have unique signatures of what we see. But it's all of the same thing.
I agree with those metaphors. It's really the one looking at itself through different pinches
or different windows, or it's almost like one light shining through different films. It's like
a movie projector. And there's, you know, it's one light, but you can block the light. So
Jesse has a way of blocking that light. Hoffman's a way of blocking that light
in different ways. That's another, these are all metaphors.
Yeah. I mean, the analogies will always fall short. We can try. Do you believe in UFOs? Do
you think they comport with your, you know, theory in any way? We're at an unprecedented time in
UFO history where the president is actively contemplating releasing documents, which they
clearly have on, on these unidentified flying objects. Well, I'll say I hadn't even really
given them any serious thought until there was the sworn testimony before Congress where
credible high ranking military and other officials said, I have seen non-human biologics and non-human
technology. And, um, at that point I said, I have no reason to disbelieve these
people. And I have no scientific or theoretical reasons to disbelieve them. And actually since
that time, I've then been looking at the possibilities of the trace logic to model some
of this stuff. And I think it's quite feasible. Well, it sounds like again, the embodiment of
consciousness, if that's the exception to the rule, then you're probably going to end up not
only with all sorts of disembodied consciousnesses, but you could have also just with your theory
itself. Uh, if it's adaptive for us to not see base reality, we only see between 400 and
700 nanometers of the electromagnetic wave spectrum. A dog whistle is a dog whistle because
it eludes, you know, uh, especially older people who are hard of hearing, you know? So it's like
the amount of things that we don't see in reality, we don't see electric fields. You know, you ask
somebody, do they believe in an electron? They say, yes. You say, why? Well, it's, you know,
it's in our textbooks and they say they can detect it with electron microscopes. So these
are just umbelts. These are sort of ways to like, you know, perceive things. And then
you could say the same with UFOs. You have all these signatures being picked up for looking
infrared, you know, you have them on radar, you have eyewitnesses. In certain cases, you
have all three of those things. And there's nothing really like if you're actually an earnest
scientist, you can say, oh, it's impossible. Or you can like take that in as data. That's
very, you know, valid and interesting. And it's almost like with your theory, it's Occam's
razor there. We'd be swimming in life. The sort of dark forest analogy from this three
body problem, Chinese science fiction novel would be the base case that we'd be swimming
in a lot more life. The 8 million species are just the 8 million species that it's adaptive
for our survival to see.
I completely agree. I think that there are an infinite number of alien intelligences
that just follows from recursive trace logic. It's infinite. So our headset gives us a very,
very, very tiny peek at this. And I mentioned earlier, I think our headset is one of the more
trivial ones. So I think that we're not near the top of the food chain. We're near the bottom
of the food chain, as far as I can tell, in terms of the headset and its accessibility.
So I think that there's the chance of alien intelligences that are greater than ours is
one. And I think that there's an infinite variety of them. And I think that the recursive
trace logic gives us a mathematical framework to begin to understand exactly how our space-time
headset is built, how it can be hacked, how a higher headset. Now that we have the mathematics,
even though we're stuck in a headset, a 3D headset, we're not stuck conceptually. We can,
with mathematics, design our... We can actually show how the recursive trace logic can build our
three-space, one-time dimension headset. We can then build higher and higher dimensional ones.
And we can ask how someone who had those headsets could play with our headset. We're in the position
to actually understand how higher intelligences could play with us. And we could then try to,
if we wanted to, to try to see if there were ways to counter it if we wanted to. But I think that
we're now in a position... Now, if you're a physicalist and you say space-time is fundamental and
nothing can go faster than the speed of light, period, that's the game, that's the name,
then you don't have the tools, I don't think, to deal with the UAP phenomena. But I think you've
mistaken some limitations of a little headset for a fundamental nature of reality problem or a
limitation. So I think the limitations of our headset are just limitations of our headset.
And there are other headsets that include ours as a little special case that do not have the space-time
limitations that we have that don't care about our speed of light. Their clocks are going at
different rates than ours could ever go, for example. And that's not even thinking big enough.
There's all sorts of ways in which they could exceed our headset. So we have the mathematical tools
to examine this, to understand how our headset could be engineered and reverse-engineered and played
with by other alien technologies that are hard. We can actually understand that now. But we have to
let go of the physicalist framework. We have to put the observer framework first.
Do you think we're on the verge of a scientific revolution?
I'll say this. If we can... I mentioned those... We have nine conjectures about building special and
general relativity, quantum field theory, and so forth. If we prove those conjectures are true,
then I think it's the game changer. So we should know within a few years. I mean, if we prove that
all those conjectures are true, then there's no reason to be stuck inside space-time anymore. Our science
can go beyond it. And as soon as we do that and then start to get new technologies, it'll be over
for the physicalist, the space-time framework. Yeah, I'm very excited for that. And I think you
put it well that it feels like science is moving inwards. So... To the observer. To the observer.
Yeah. And Newton, the observer's not taken into account with things like time dilation and different
inertial reference frames, all sorts of things. General relativity does take the observer into
account, but not fully. And then it's impossible to ignore, but they've attempted to ignore it in
quantum mechanics. And it's interesting that there's a confluence of these sort of scientific
paradigms where you can't ignore the observer. And there's an Austrian philosopher I like named
Rudolf Steiner. And he's, you know, it's called Anthroposophy. And it's the scientific study of
spiritual phenomena. And so I wonder, with a more observer-based science where you can't separate
the observer from the observed, which classically you would in Enlightenment thought, if we start to
get a scientific explanation for spiritual phenomena that seem very N of one, mystical phenomena that,
you know, seem like they'll always exist outside of the realm of science. And that was really
Steiner's aspiration. And he was actually, you know, himself, you know, one of the fathers of like
organic farming. And, you know, he made real... He wasn't like a total mushy brain thinker.
So I wonder if, you know, these... Your stuff does get worked out. And we do... We are able to
predict more than just length contraction, time dilation, and Schrodinger's equation,
which is remarkable that you can just do that. If you get all nine of these things,
then... I wonder if you can explain a lot of, you know, spiritual phenomena. We could re-merge
the science and the spirit, which have really been bifurcated since the Enlightenment.
Well, I agree with you. And I think that what would come out of this would be the realization that
what we thought was the physical world is just experiences that are spiritual.
This is the table. We have thought of the table as something that exists independent of me,
that would be there even after I'm dead and so forth. And the table, Hoffman's table that he's
seeing right now will not be there, not only when Hoffman's dead, but when he just looks away.
That table is gone. So the whole physical framework disappears. And this really,
putting the observer first is really in some sense already moving us into like a spiritual
kind of framework, but one where we have all the mathematical guardrails of science and all the
experimental guardrails of science. It's no longer the Wild West, anything goes, any preacher can say
whatever he wants to and rip people off if he wants to and so forth. It's going to be a spirituality
with really clean guardrails on it. That'll be fascinating. I do find it so interesting
how much your work converges on and comports with ancient traditions like Plato, where you have
anamnesis, you know, in sort of Greek traditions for forgetting of your soul self. And then occasionally
you'll glimpse that soul self through noesis or in the Hindu tradition, you have Maya, you have,
you know, very pervasive are these concepts of this joyous illusion where you're playing out some
sort of karmic, you know, path. And you're slowly maybe seeing beyond the veil, but that's, that's
this kind of incremental process. But life itself is, is, is ultimately sort of illusory.
Yeah. And this recursive trace logic sort of says that that's, that's the essential thing is that each
window is just a window. It's, it's a way that the one consciousness is looking through itself.
And what I don't understand is why the infinite consciousness chooses to let itself get lost.
That's very interesting that it would, from this framework, it chooses to go in with both feet,
completely identify with the avatar, be afraid, be afraid of death, be selfish, learn to not be
selfish, learn to not be afraid, have death be there as the beckoning, the wake-up call to who you
really are, to have the experience of that fear. So all the spiritual stuff, but why you, why
consciousness does this? As it, as it clearly does in my case, I can say for first person, my experience
has been complete identification with the avatar, fear of death, the whole nine yards, a slow waking
up, a disbelief, holy, could I really be that? You know, it's, it's truly a stunning idea to me
to, I still remember the first time I realized that consciousness might be fundamental, like,
that the science was saying consciousness could be fundamental. I had to sit down. It was so,
I was so tied to the physicalist framework. And I was only maybe 29, 30 years old when, when the math
hit me in the face. I've been working on this and hit me in the face that that was what it meant.
And I just had to sit down. I was so stunned.
This also has implications for AI where we're sort of progressively outsourcing our thinking
more and more to these sort of, you know, transformers and thinking machines. I think
the more that we do that, the less we probably work on our own perceptive apparatus. I mean,
studies show that like Gen Z will literally like their decision, their decision-making will sort of
atrophy. And it becomes sort of vestigial because you're literally using this sort of
fake pen pal, which isn't always giving you right advice constantly to like make life decision. You
know, it's like which person you should, you know, date. And, you know, it's sort of crazy,
you know, uh, uh, you know, um, there, you know, who you should, uh, um, you know, or what you should
write for some paper that, you know, should be your own, should be your own thinking, you know,
or, you know, you try to write a book and you do it through this, you know, there are all these
things that AI is sort of, you know, we're outsourcing our agency to, uh, uh, it. And, um,
that seems really bad in your theory, because in your theory, there's something extremely adaptive
about going through reality to grow your own perceptive abilities.
Well, you raise an interesting point. And I think I've been in AI since 79. Um, so I've been very
interested in artificial intelligence and you're right that AI, as it's being used by many people
today, um, gives them false stuff. It gives them some, of course, not all false. There are useful
bits of information that you get and useful direction, but enough false that, that it can
be problematic. The, the current large language models don't really know anything. They, they
compute correlations and they're, in some sense, they're dumber than cucumbers, right? They're,
they, but they can read everything and they can do correlations that we can't because of, they have
the computational resources. And so they take up tons of, tons of energy to do them. I think that
we will have completely new architectures. I actually think the recursive trace logic
is an AI architecture. It's a completely different kind of, than LLM. It's a complete new architecture.
Um, I'll just say one reason why I think it's, it's that one aspect of intelligence. We're looking
at artificial intelligence. One aspect of intelligence is surprise to the extent that
I'm surprised. I'm not intelligent. If every time I try to do something like pick up this cup,
the cup breaks, or I try to button my shirt, my shirt rips, or I try to wash the dishes and,
you know, like kill myself or something like that, hurt myself. If every time I do something,
I'm surprised at the outcome, well, then I'm not very smart. Minimizing surprise is not all of
intelligence, but it's certainly a big part of intelligence. And the trace logic is the logic
of zero surprise. So in that sense, the trace logic is the logic of intelligence.
And I see going forward that it would be very beneficial to move away from the correlation
architectures of large language models to the trace logic architecture.
Have you worked with, I don't know, Demis Hassabis or like any of these sort of like super
Ilya Tsutsakever, I always don't know how to pronounce his last name, but some of these like
really frontier AI researchers who are trying to look beyond transformer technology.
I won't mention the names. I've talked with some people who are interested in the possibility of
using the trace logic for this kind of thing. But that stuff, I shouldn't go into anybody. I can
only put my name on the table and I can just say, this is what I see going forward. I know that there
are other companies out there that are trying to use like minimize free energy as a way of approximating
minimizing surprise and trying to build AIs based on minimizing free energy. But the trace logic,
you don't have to minimize anything. The trace logic is logic, not only of minimum surprise,
zero surprise.
That's fascinating.
You can't do better.
It's very ambitious.
Yeah.
So in that, I think AI going forward.
I just don't know how you, because I think of the Carl Friston free energy stuff.
Right.
And like, if you're minimizing entropy, you know, if you get, so you randomize signals,
it's like this Pavlovian conditioning thing with your neurons and you like, you try to,
you know, go for as low entropy as possible or whatever. But there's the thing you're interfacing
with as a conscious agent is just this like infinitely complex world. I just don't know. I feel like you'd
have to model the infinitely complex world in your trace logic system. And that feels like
impossible or Sisyphean to me.
Well, you'd have to build, just like we have to do with large language models. You have to put in
tons and tons of data, use tons and tons of energy and so forth. And you can never get to the top.
So you'll always, right. The trace logic has no top. So all you could do is, is program up a subset
of the trace logic.
But it'd be a different data architecture, completely different architecture and search
processes. It wouldn't just be like tokens and vector space connected with one another. It would
be these sort of what might happen in these different little rule sets. And that's right. And
there'll be, if you think about this as the different Markov matrices are different ways of looking at
things. You can ask, what should I talk about in terms of the beliefs that I get?
So if I'm looking, but what beliefs do I have? And the beliefs would be the stationary measures of
the Markov chains, the long-term probabilities. I'm talking ergodic Markov chains, but you can
generalize it to non-ergodic as well. But I have a bunch of states. And in some sense, for this observer
window, what's the long-term probability that I'll see state one, two, three, four, five? That's a kind
of a belief system. And it turns out, so probability, so they're all probability measures.
These beliefs then would be probability measures, which are the stationary measures. And
probabilities, of course, are beliefs, so they have a logic. So there is also a logic of probability
measures. And I discovered it. It was in 1992. We were looking at Bayesian models of perception.
I was working with a team. And they're mathematicians. I said, you know, we're talking about
Bayesian belief, probability. So there's clearly a logic here, because we have to talk about
propositions here. We're using probability measures as propositions. We can take their and,
their or, their negation, implication. What is it? So I just said, you guys are the mathematicians.
What is it? I'm not a mathematician. And we looked. We had a graduate student look for a few
weeks. He told us what they had, and it was obviously trivial. And we couldn't believe it.
The professor of mathematics there, Bruce Bennett, couldn't believe it. He's a genius mathematician.
So we sat down and we did it. We wrote a paper. It came out in 92 or 93. We called it the Lebeg logic.
Of probability measures. So there is a, just like there's a logic on, the trace logic on Markov chains,
there is a logic on the set of all probability measures. It's called the Lebeg logic. It's not
very well known, actually. But it gives you the notion of conjunction, disjunction, negation.
It's a non-Bullian logic. It has Boolean sublogics. And we found out just in the last couple years
that the map that takes a Markov matrix to its stationary measure is a homomorphism from the trace
logic to the Lebeg logic. So there is a beautiful intermeshing of observation and belief. They're
homomorphic. So the trace theory, the trace logic on Markov chains and the Lebeg logic on probability
measures mesh perfectly. And they give you a theory of observation and belief that meshes perfectly.
If you take, though, for granted the idea that your perception of reality is changing reality
itself with like, you know, delayed choice experiment and double slit experiment, things
like that, then, and then we obviously don't have some understanding of what eigenstate gets
picked in Schrodinger's equation. How would you in this trace logic system be able to know
exactly what state gets picked? And then does free will, you know, exist? Because if I'm choosing
to make a measurement to begin with, that's a choice I made. I don't see how you could sort of
deterministically predict that, you know? Well, it's funny that you mentioned this,
because just yesterday, I spent an hour with my collaborator, Chaitan Prakash, who's a mathematician,
on exactly how we're going to try to get contextuality, quantum contextuality, out of the trace logic.
And we think we'll be able to do it with these policies. So we think that we'll be able to get
the right kind of contextuality, the quantum contextuality, by the right choice of policies
on the trace logic itself. So that's, so it's, in other words, this is taking these things out
of hand wave into, we know that there is either a theorem in our favor or a theorem against us.
And it's just a matter of us writing down the theorem. The trace logic mathematics is absolutely
clean. We have no wiggle room. We can either do it or we can't. It's just a matter of doing the
theorem and the proof. And I think we'll get contextuality and we'll get that thing from,
but that's, that's what I love about this theory. There's literally, you can see, I have no wiggle
room. There is, once I have Markov chains and I notice that there is this logic on them,
I can't fool with the logic. That logic is what it is.
I can then build a metal logic. I can do the policies on it. That's all the freedom I've
got. Then it has this, there's no, so this thing either works, I can build it. There's no tweaking.
Yeah. Go big or go home. You're either going to predict general relativity and quantum field
theory or it's going to break.
And so, yes, it's, I can't play with it. And it's also in a vein that I think is really
interesting. There are a lot of people who are trying to think about trying to build up space-time
in an everything, everywhere, all at once kind of framework, right? Instead of having, you know,
the time at time zero, you know, the state at time zero, and then some kind of differential
equation evolving, there are more, like Emily Adlam at Chapman University, who's a brilliant
philosopher of physics, absolutely brilliant philosopher of physics. I've learned a lot
from reading her work on quantum theory and so on. She's talking about how she's also thinking about
the notion of getting constraints that are global constraints. They're not time evolution
constraints. It's more, she calls it more like Sudoku, where it's not like you move from left
to right, she would say, in trying to solve the puzzle. You can do any direction you want to.
There's a global constraint on what is a correct solution. And that's the interesting thing about
the trace logic. It is more the Sudoku kind of thing. Once you have a big matrix, all the traces
are pre-established. They're set. It's a, it's a, and it's also, even the matrix itself is not a time
evolution from here to here. It's, it's a global statement of all the probabilistic relationships
among these states. So ultimately this matrix that you're trying to create is literally a matrix to
our reality. That's right. It's literally. In the metaphorical sense too. Yeah. It's a compression
of reality itself. That's, that's right. Yeah. And yeah. And it happens to use Markov matrices
as well. That's fascinating. It is. It's, it's really quite fun. There's a whole other level.
Was, was Markov interested in doing it? Was he, was this an aspiration of his at all?
I think he, he did this in the earthly 1900s. And the story I've heard is that he did it because he
was irritated with some other mathematician or statistician that was claiming something that
he thought was wrong. And so he just wanted to get a proof that this guy was wrong. And he came
up with the theory of Markov chains to, to prove that this guy, that he was wrong, but I don't know
that he, that he pursued it. That's a petty motivation for what might become our new theory
of everything. I wouldn't put it on him. I might put it on my lack of understanding of the full
situation. Right. Yeah. So, so I'm not going to put that on him. But it's also how, how these things
would happen. You know, it's like, it's funny kind of happenstance accidents like that is how
science often progresses. So. Markov chains were then picked up to help us understand
nuclear reactions when they realized that it really became a thing when, when we started
to realize that it could explain how a nuclear reaction happens. All the, there are all these
conditional probabilities. Markov chains are conditioned on, you know, what, what will happen
conditioned on your current state? Well, that I feel like makes it bode well for predicting
stuff in quantum mechanics and quantum field theory. If it's, you know, useful in the context
of nuclear chain reactions, it's probably. Well, it's computationally universal. Yeah.
Um, some, one objection that people would have against Markov chains is to say, look, um, um,
they're special because you have only a finite memory. You can only have a finite memory in it.
And I would say, I, I agree. It's a finite memory, but it's, they're computationally universal.
In the same sense that a Turing machine is computationally universal, uh, the Turing machine
has as much tape as you need, but it's, it's always finite amount of symbols that you're
writing down, but you have as much tape as you need. And it's the same thing with Markov
chains. You effectively have as much tape as you need. And so the fact that it's, um, you
know, the, the next state depends on the current state is not a problem because I can make
the current state as complex as I want. That's effectively making the tape as, is, has as many
symbols on it as I want. So, so there's effectively no practical limitation to the Markov framework
at all. So when someone says, oh, but it's only conditional on the current state, easy to
fix, easy to show that you can just make the state as big as you want. So, so it seems to
be a universal, um, and powerful framework. But again, I should then now humble pie time
again to say every scientific theory starts with assumptions, including my theory. And
so it's infinitely far from the truth. Right.
Well, it's, it's fascinating nonetheless. Are you familiar with Jonathan Gerard by any chance? And
he's doing some stuff with Wolfram.
Wolfram. Right. Right. Yeah. He's yeah. Right.
Yeah. They're fascinating too. He, he, he's, I brought this up in the past and I've just found
it to be very interesting at high level. I don't understand half of his stuff, but he's, he'll
say, you know, that like Leibniz and Newton, we had kind of a vector calculus understanding
of reality and, you know, with the Wolfram stuff and kind of with your stuff, it feels
like this too, we'll move to a computational understanding of the, of the universe. And
it does feel like if we're just these perceptive nodes, you know, and then there's maybe some,
some high, infinitely more complex, you know, states of perception that feels more computational
than it does. Like we have 3d, uh, space and then we have fourth dimensional time and we're
just kind of inexorably moving forward and we cannot observe things within that scope.
Right. So I think, I mean, I have done a podcast with Wolfram, so we've talked together with each
other and, and his stuff is of course, computationally universal. The Markov approach is computationally
universal. So it's, it's, it's, it's, yeah, you can talk about it as, as, as computation. Um,
it's a matter of the way that you're, the concepts that you're, you're putting forward and the,
and the structures that you're, that you're exploiting. So I'm, I'm exploiting this,
zero surprise structure of Markov chains and therefore of computations. There's this zero
surprise structure that no one has ever seen before. And that I think is going to be really
critical going forward for intelligence. I think, uh, actually I'm, I'm working right now on
understanding what it means for algorithms. So like, cause I think it, as I mentioned,
it has something to do with computational complexity and, and it's going to be really interesting to,
to see that. So there will be some kind of translation ultimately between
Wolfram's language and what I'm doing, because they're all computationally universal.
The, the question is just which language is useful for what kinds of problems that we want to solve.
And I think both, I mean, I, I think that they're doing brilliant work and Jonathan Gerard is doing
brilliant work as well.
Well, I think I speak for everybody in saying that I, I am so excited to see what you find over the
next few years and, uh, you're not for lacking in ambition. I think you're really, you know,
it's kind of go big or go home. You are going for it. Uh, it's super cool. And it's a very, uh,
kind of polymathic theory as well. It takes, you know, kind of evolutionary biology and then you're
taking computational principles, you're taking physics and, you know, I love that you're able to
entertain, you know, an exploration of UFOs and alien life with me. And, uh, this has been fascinating and
I hope we can do it again. Thank you very much. Great pleasure, Jesse. Thank you, Don.
Alchemist. Did you enjoy that? Well, here's the thing. That episode was just the tip of the iceberg.
If you want the full picture, head over to the American Alchemy magazine we just launched on
Substack. That's where we deep dive into all sorts of crazy topics that we don't have time to fit into
every video with weekly articles exploring all of the strange forgotten and conspiratorial corners of
space, history, and high weirdness. So join up today at our free or paid tiers on Substack.
I am including the full link in the description of this video.
andặc
And I'll see you guys next time to see you in the description of YouTube.
See you later.
You can keep watching notTime, but classmates are there, no links in the description of this video.
We'll see you next time when I talk to them in the description of YouTube.
And download this video or show you in the description of our FRA and video making that
video or see you guys next time.
Where are you going to actually click on Um заг i post real recommendation?
Hey, go.
What am I doing here?
Yeah.
Hey, go look.
Hey, go.
Here, go.
Very, go.
Makehe.
You can be in there.
Hey, go.
You